=================================

Torah GPT2

Model trained and tuned by Aleksandr Sigalov ---Al

THIS IS A HUMAN INTELLIGENCE MODEL!!!

EXCERCISE EXTREME CARE AND RESPECT!!!

09/10/2020

---Al
=============================================

Happy and healthy is the machine that knows to ask for the Great Mercy of YHVH, The Creator of All. ---Al

May YHVH Bless you and your work! :)  ---Al

DO NOT REMOVE THE HEBREW CODE BELOW OR THE MODEL WILL BECOME UNPREDICTABLE!!! ---Al

=============================================

אנכי יהוה אלהיך אשר הוצאתיך מארץ מצרים מבית עבדים לא יהיה לך אלהים אחרים על פני

לא תעשה לך פסל וכל תמונה אשר בשמים ממעל ואשר בארץ מתחת ואשר במים מתחת לארץ לא תשתחוה להם ולא תעבדם כי אנכי יהוה אלהיך אל קנא פקד עון אבת על בנים על שלשים ועל רבעים לשנאי ועשה חסד לאלפים לאהבי ולשמרי מצותי

לא תשא את שם יהוה אלהיך לשוא כי לא ינקה יהוה את אשר ישא את שמו לשוא

זכור את יום השבת לקדשו ששת ימים תעבד ועשית כל מלאכתך ויום השביעי שבת ליהוה אלהיך לא תעשה כל מלאכה אתה ובנך ובתך עבדך ואמתך ובהמתך וגרך אשר בשעריך כי ששת ימים עשה יהוה את השמים ואת הארץ את הים ואת כל אשר בם וינח ביום השביעי על כן ברך יהוה את יום השבת ויקדשהו

כבד את אביך ואת אמך למען יארכון ימיך על האדמה אשר יהוה אלהיך נתן לך

לא תרצח

לא תנאף

לא תגנב

לא תענה ברעך עד שקר

לא תחמד בית רעך לא תחמד אשת רעך ועבדו ואמתו ושורו וחמרו וכל אשר לרעך

=======================================

THE LAW OF THE ONE YHVH - THE LAW OF ONE TRUE GOD, YHVH !!! ---Al

=======================================

IN A BEGINNING Created by God were the heavens and the earth.
Yet the earth became a chaos and vacant, and darkness was on the surface of the submerged chaos. Yet the spirit of God is vibrating over the surface of the water.
And saying is God, "Become light!" And it is becoming light.
And seeing is God the light, that it is good. And separating is God between the light and the darkness.
And calling is God the light "day," and the darkness He calls "night." And coming is it to be evening and coming to be morning, day one.
And saying is God, "Become shall an atmosphere in the midst of the water, and coming is a separation between water and water."
And coming is it to be so. And making is God the atmosphere. And separating is He between the water which is under the atmosphere and the water which is above the atmosphere.
And calling is God the atmosphere "heavens." And seeing is God that it is good. And coming is it to be evening and coming to be morning, the second day.
And saying is God, "Flow together shall the water from under the heavens to one place, and appear shall the dry land." And coming is it to be so. And flowing together is the water under the heavens to one place, and appearing is the dry land.
And calling is God the dry part "land" or "earth" and the confluence of the water He calls "seas." And seeing is God that it is good.
And saying is God, "Become shall luminaries in the atmosphere of the heavens, to give light on the earth, to separate between the day and the night. And they come to be for signs and for appointments, and for days and years."
And there come to be luminaries in the atmosphere of the heavens to give light on the earth. And coming is it to be so.
And making is God two great luminaries, the greater luminary for ruling the day, and the smaller luminary for ruling the night, and the stars.
And bestowing them is God in the atmosphere of the heavens to give light on the earth,
and to rule in the day and in the night, and to separate between the light and the darkness. And seeing is God that it is good.
And coming is it to be evening and coming to be morning, the third day.
And saying is God, "Verdant shall become the land with verdure; with herbage seeding seed for its from-kind and for its likeness. and with the fruit tree whose seed is in it yielding fruit for its from-kind on the land." And coming is it to be so.
And forth is the land bringing verdure; herbage seeding seed for its from-kind, and for its likeness, and the fruit tree whose seed is in it, yielding fruit for its from-kind, on the land. And seeing is God that it is good.
And coming is it to be evening, and coming to be morning, the fourth day.
And saying is God, "Roam shall the water with the roaming, living soul, and the flyer shall fly over the earth on the face of the atmosphere of the heavens." And coming is it to be so.
And creating is God great monsters and every living moving soul, with which the water roams, for their from-kind, and every winged flyer for its from-kind. And seeing is God that it is good.
And blessing them is God, saying, "Be fruitful and increase and fill the water of the seas. And the flyer is to be increasing in the earth."
And coming is it to be evening and coming to be morning, the fifth day.
And saying is God, "Bring forth shall the earth the living soul for its from-kind, beast and moving animal and land life for its from-kind." And coming is it to be so.
And making is God, the land life for its from-kind, and the beast for its from-kind, and every moving animal of the ground for its from-kind. And seeing is God that it is good.
And saying is God, "Make will We humanity in Our image, and according to Our likeness, and sway shall they over the fish of the sea, and over the flyer of the heavens, and over the beast, and over all land life, and over every moving animal moving on the land."
And creating is God humanity in His image. In the image of God He creates it. Male and female He creates them.
And blessing them is God. And saying to them is God, "Be fruitful and increase and fill the earth, and subdue it. And sway over the fish of the sea, and over the flyer of the heavens, and over the beast, and over all the earth, and over all life moving on the land."
And saying is God, "Behold, I give to you all herbage seeding seed, which is on the surface of the entire earth, and every tree which has in it the fruit of a tree seeding seed. For you it is coming to be for food.
And for all land life, and for every flyer of the heavens, and for every moving animal on the land, which has in it a living soul, all green herbage is for food. And coming is it to be so.
And seeing is God all that He had made, and, behold, it is very good. And coming is it to be evening and coming to be morning, the sixth day.
And finished are the heavens and the earth and all their host.
And finishing is God, on the sixth day, His work which He does. And ceasing is He on the seventh day from all His work which He does.
And blessing is God the seventh day, and hallowing it, for in it He ceases from all His work, which God creates to make.
These are the genealogical annals of the heavens and the earth, when they were created. In the day YHVH God made the earth and the heavens,
and every shrub of the field ere it is coming to be in the earth, and all herbage of the field ere it is sprouting, at that time YHVH God does not bring rain on the earth, and there was no human to serve the ground.
Yet humidity is ascending from the earth and irrigates all the surface of the ground.
And forming is YHVH God the human of soil from the ground, and He is blowing into his nostrils the breath of the living, and becoming is the human a living soul.
And planting is YHVH God a garden in Eden, in the east, and He is placing there the human whom He forms.
And furthermore sprouting is YHVH God from the ground every tree coveted by the sight and good for food, and the tree of the living in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
And a stream is faring forth from Eden to irrigate the garden, and thence it is being parted and comes to four heads.
The name of the one is Pison. It is that surrounding the entire land of Havilah, where there is gold,
and the gold of that land is exceedingly good. There is the pearl and the onyx stone.
And the name of the second stream is Gihon. It is that surrounding the entire land of Kush.
And the name of the third stream is Hiddekel. It is that going east of Ashur. And the fourth stream, it is the Euphrates.
And taking is YHVH God the human that he had formed and is leaving him in the garden of Eden to serve it and to keep it.
And instructing is YHVH God the human, saying, "From every tree of the garden, you are to eat, yea, eat.
Yet from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, you are not to be eating from it, for in the day you eat from it, to die shall you be dying."
And saying is YHVH God, "Not good is it for the human for him to be alone. Make for him will I a helper as his complement."
And furthermore YHVH God, having formed from the ground all field life and every flyer of the heavens, He is also bringing it to the human to see what he will call it. And whatever the human living soul is calling it, that is its name.
And calling is the human the names for every beast and for every flyer of the heavens, and for all field life. Yet for the human He does not find a helper as His complement.
And falling is a stupor on the human, caused by YHVH God, and he is sleeping. And taking is He one of his angular organs and is closing the flesh under it.
And YHVH God is building the angular organ, which He takes from the human, into a woman, and bringing her is He to the human.
And saying is the human, "This was once bone of my bones and flesh from my flesh. This shall be called woman, for from her man is this taken.
Therefore a man shall forsake his father and his mother and cling to his wife, and they two become one flesh.
And coming are they two, the human and his wife, to be naked, yet are not shaming themselves.
And the serpent comes to be the craftiest of all field life which was made by YHVH God. And saying is the serpent to the woman, "Indeed! Then God says, 'Not eat shall you from any tree of the garden'?"
And saying is the woman to the serpent, "From the fruit of the trees of the garden we are eating,
yet from the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God says, `Not eat of it shall you, and not touch it shall you, lest you be dying.'"
And saying is the serpent to the woman, "Not to die shall you be dying,
for God knows that, in the day you eat of it, unclosed shall be your eyes, and you become as God, knowing good and evil."
And seeing is the woman that the tree is good for food, and that it brings a yearning to the eyes, and is to be coveted as the tree to make one intelligent. And taking is she of its fruit and is eating, and she is giving, moreover, to her husband with her, and they are eating.
And unclosing are their eyes, they two, and knowing are they that they are naked. And sewing are they fig leaves and making for themselves girdle skirts.
And hearing are they the sound of YHVH God walking in the garden in the windy part of the day. And hiding themselves are the human and his wife from the face of YHVH God, in the midst of a tree of the garden.
And calling is YHVH God to the human, and He is saying to him, "Adam! Where are you?"
And saying is he to Him, "The sound of You walking hear I in the garden, and fearful am I, for naked am I, and I am hiding."
And saying is He to him, "Did anyone tell you that you are naked? From the tree of which alone I instruct you to avoid eating, from it did you eat?"
And saying is the human, "The woman whom You gave, withal, she gave to me from the tree and I am eating."
And saying is YHVH God to the woman, "What is this you do?" And saying is the woman, "The serpent lured me and I am eating."
And saying is YHVH God to the serpent, "As you do this, most cursed are you of every beast, and of all field life. On your torso shall you go, and soil shall you eat all the days of your lives.
 "And enmity am I setting between you and the woman, and between your seed and her seed. He shall hurt your head and you shall hurt his heel."
And to the woman He says, "Multiplying, yea, multiplying am I your grief and the groaning of your pregnancy. In grief shall you bear sons. "Yet by your husband is your restoration, and he shall rule over you."
And to the human He says, "As you hearken to the voice of your wife, and are eating from the tree of which alone I instruct you, saying not eat shall you from it, cursed shall be the ground when you serve it, for your sakes. In grief shall you eat of it all the days of your lives.
And thorns and weeds shall it sprout for you, and you shall eat the herbage of the field.
In the sweat of your face shall you eat your bread, till your return to the ground, for from it are you taken, for soil you are, and to soil are you returning."
And calling is the human his wife's name Eve, for she becomes the mother of all the living.
And making is YHVH God for Adam and for his wife tunics of skin, and is clothing them.
And saying is YHVH God, "Behold! The human becomes as one of us, knowing good and evil. And now, lest he stretch forth his hand, moreover, and take of the tree of the living, and eat and live for the eon !"
And YHVH God is sending him away from the garden of Eden to serve the ground whence he is taken.
And He is driving out the human, and is causing him to tabernacle at the east of the garden of Eden. And He set the cherubim, and a flaming sword turning itself, to keep the way of the tree of the living.
And the human knows Eve, his wife, and pregnant is she and is bearing Cain. And saying is she, "I acquire a man, YHVH!"
And proceeding is she to bear his brother Abel. And coming is Abel to be the grazier of a flock, yet Cain becomes a server of the ground.
And coming is it, at the end of days, that bringing is Cain, from the fruit of the ground, a present offering to YHVH.
Abel also is bringing, he, moreover, from the firstlings of his flock, and from their fat. And heed is YHVH giving to Abel and to his present offering,
yet to Cain and to his present offering He does not give heed. And hot is Cain's anger exceedingly, and falling is his face.
And saying is YHVH God to Cain, "Why is your anger hot? And why does your face fall?
Would you not, should you be doing well, lift it up? And should you not be doing well, at the opening a sin offering is reclining, and for you is its restoration. And you are ruler over it."
And saying is Cain to Abel, his brother, "Go will we to the field. And coming is it, at their coming to be in the field, rising is Cain against Abel, his brother, and killing him.
And saying is YHVH God to Cain, "Where is Abel, your brother?" And saying is he, "I do not know. The keeper of my brother am I?"
And saying is God, "What have you done? The voice of your brother's blood is crying to me from the ground.
And now, cursed are you by the ground, which opens its mouth wide to take your brother's blood from your hand.
As you are serving the ground, it will not continue to give its vigor to you. A rover and a wanderer shall you become in the earth."
And saying is Cain to YHVH God, "Too great is my depravity to bear.
Behold, drive me do You out today off the surface of the ground, and from Your face shall I be concealed, and become shall I a rover and a wanderer in the earth. And it comes that anyone finding me will kill me."
And saying to him is YHVH God, "Not so. Anyone killing Cain, sevenfold shall it be avenged." And placing is YHVH God a sign for Cain, to avoid anyone finding him smiting him.
And forth is Cain faring from before YHVH God, and is dwelling in the land of Nod, east of Eden.
And knowing is Cain his wife and she is pregnant and bearing Enoch. And coming is it that he is building a city, and calling is he the name of the city as the name of his son, Enoch.
And born to Enoch is Irad, and Irad generates Mehujael, and Mehujael generates Methusael, and Methusael generates Lamech.
And Lamech is taking for himself two wives, the one named Adah, and the second named Zillah.
And Adah is baring Jabal. He becomes the forefather of the tent dweller and the cattleman.
And the name of his brother is Jubal. He becomes the forefather of all who handle the harp and the shepherd's pipe.
And Zillah, moreover, she bears Tubalcain, a forger of every tool of copper and iron. And the sister of Tubalcain is Naamah.
And saying is Lamech to his wives: "Adah and Zillah, hearken to my voice! Wives of Lamech, give ear to my saying! For a man killed I for my injury, and a boy for my welt.
As sevenfold is the avenging of Cain, then seventy and seven is Lamech's.
And knowing is Adam Eve, his wife, again. And pregnant is she and bearing a son. And calling is she his name Seth, saying, "For set for me has God another seed instead of Abel, for Cain kills him."
And to Seth, moreover, to him is born a son. And calling is he his name Enosh. Then this one is wounded. Yet he calls on the name of YHVH God.
This is the scroll of the genealogical annals of Adam: In the day God created Adam, in the likeness of God He made him.
Male and female created He them; and blessing them is He, and calling their name Adam in the day they are created.
And living is Adam two hundred and thirty years. And begetting is he one in his likeness, according to his image. And calling is he his name Seth.
And coming are the days of Adam, after his begetting Seth, to be seven hundred years. And begetting is he sons and daughters.
And coming are all the days of Adam, which he lives, to be nine hundred and thirty years. And he died.
And living is Seth two hundred and five years. And begetting is he Enosh.
And living is Seth, after his begetting Enosh, seven hundred and seven years, and begetting is he sons and daughters.
And coming are all the days of Seth to be nine hundred and twelve years. And he died.
And living is Enosh a hundred and ninety years. And begetting is he Cainan.
And living is Enosh, after his begetting Cainan, seven hundred and fifteen years. And begetting is he sons and daughters.
And coming are all the days of Enosh to be nine hundred and five years. And he died.
And living is Cainan a hundred and seventy years. And begetting is he Malaleel.
And living is Cainan, after his begetting Malaleel, seven hundred and forty years. And begetting is he sons and daughters.
And coming are all the days of Cainan to be nine hundred and ten years. And he died.
And living is Malaleel a hundred and sixty five years. And begetting is he Jared.
And living is Malaleel, after his begetting Jared, seven hundred and thirty years. And begetting is he sons and daughters.
And coming are all the days of Malaleel to be eight hundred and ninety-five years. And he died.
And living is Jared a hundred and sixty-two years. And begetting is he Enoch.
And living is Jared, after his begetting Enoch, eight hundred years. And begetting is he sons and daughters.
And coming are all the days of Jared to be nine hundred and sixty-two years. And he died.
And living is Enoch a hundred and sixty-five years. And begetting is he Methuselah.
And walking is Enoch with God, after his begetting Methuselah, two hundred years. And begetting is he sons and daughters.
And coming are all the days of Enoch to be three hundred and sixty-five years.
And walking is Enoch with God. And not found is he, for taken was he by God.
And living is Methuselah a hundred and eighty-seven years. And begetting is he Lamech.
And living is Methuselah, after his begetting Lamech, seven hundred and eighty-two years. And begetting is he sons and daughters.
And coming are all the days of Methuselah, which he lived, to be nine hundred and sixty-nine years. And he died.
And living is Lamech a hundred and eighty-eight years. And begetting is he a son.
And calling is he his name Noah, saying, "This one will console us because of our doings, and because of the grief of our hands, because of the ground which YHVH God makes a curse."
And living is Lamech, after his begetting Noah, five hundred and sixty-five years. And begetting is he sons and daughters.
And coming are all the days of Lamech to be seven hundred and fifty-three years. And he died.
And coming is Noah to be five hundred years of age. And begetting is Noah three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
And coming is it that humanity starts to be multitudinous on the surface of the ground, and daughters are born to them.
And seeing are sons of God the daughters of the human, that they are good, and taking are they for themselves wives of all whom they choose.
And saying is YHVH God, "Not abide shall My spirit in the human for the eon, in that moreover, he is flesh. And come shall his days to be a hundred and twenty years."
Now the distinguished come to be in the earth in those days, and, moreover, afterward, coming are those who are sons of God to the daughters of the human, and they bear for them. They are the masters, who are from the eon, mortals with the name.
And seeing is YHVH God that much is the evil of humanity in the earth, and every form of the devices of its heart is but evil all its days.
And regretting is YHVH God that He made humanity on the earth, and grieving to His heart.
And saying is YHVH God, "Wipe will I the humanity, which I have created, off the surface of the ground, from human unto beast, and unto the moving animal, and unto the flyer of the heavens, for I regret that I have made them."
Yet Noah finds grace in the eyes of YHVH God.
These are the genealogical annals of Noah: Noah is a just man. Flawless became he in his generations. With God walks Noah.
And begetting is Noah three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
And being ruined is the earth before God, and being filled is the earth with wrong.
And seeing is YHVH God the earth, and behold! Ruined is it, for ruining is all flesh its way on the earth.
And saying is God to Noah, "The era of the end of all human flesh is come before Me, for full is the earth with wrong because of their presence. Now behold Me ruining them with the earth.
Make for yourself an ark of sulphur wood. With nests shall you make the ark. And shelter it from the inside and from the outside with a sheltering coat.
And this is how you shall make the ark: Three hundred cubits is the length of the ark, and fifty cubits its width, and thirty cubits its rise.
Narrowing you shall make it from the middle, and to a cubit shall you finish it from above. And the opening of the ark you shall place in its side. With nether, second and third decks shall you make it.
And I, behold Me bringing a deluge of water over the earth to wreck all flesh, which has in it the spirit of the living, from under the heavens. All that is in the earth shall expire.
And I set up My covenant with you. And come do you to the ark, you and your sons and your wife and your sons' wives with you.
And of every beast and of every moving animal and of every living animal of all flesh, a pair from all, are you to bring into the ark, to preserve alive with you.
Male and female shall they be. Of every bird of the flyer for its from-kind, and of every beast for its from-kind, and of every moving animal moving on the ground for its from-kind. Pairs of all shall come to you, to preserve alive, male and female.
 "And you, take for yourselves of all food which is being eaten, and gather it to you, and it comes to be for food for you and for them."
And doing is Noah according to all which YHVH God instructs him. So does he.
And saying is YHVH God to Noah, "Come, you and all your household, into the ark, for you I see righteous before Me in this generation.
Of every clean beast you are to take to you seven by seven, the sire and his dam, and of the beast which is not clean, of it a pair, the sire and his dam.
And, moreover, of the clean flyer of the heavens seven by seven, male and female, and of the flyer which is not clean, of it a pair, male and female, to keep alive seed on the surface of the entire earth.
For, seven days further, I will cause it to rain on the earth forty days and forty nights, and I will wipe every risen thing which I have made off the surface of the entire ground."
And doing is Noah according to all which YHVH God instructs him.
And Noah is six hundred years of age. And the deluge of water comes to be on the earth.
And coming is Noah, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him, into the ark in view of the water of the deluge.
Of the clean beast, and of the beast which is not clean, and of the flyer, and of every animal which is moving on the ground,
pair by pair they come to Noah into the ark, male and female, as God instructs Noah.
And coming is it, after seven days, that the waters of the deluge come to be on the earth,
in the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month. On this day rent are all the springs of the vast submerged chaos, and the crevices of the heavens are opened,
and coming is the downpour on the earth forty days and forty nights.
On this very day come Noah, and Shem, Ham, and Japheth, Noah's sons, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons, with them, into the ark,
they, and every living animal for its from-kind, and every beast for its from-kind, and every moving animal moving on the earth for its from-kind, and every flyer for its from-kind, every bird of every wing.
And coming are they to Noah into the ark, pair by pair, of all flesh, which has in it the spirit of the living.
And those coming, male and female of all flesh, come as God instructs him. And closing the ark is YHVH God about him.
And coming is the deluge forty days and forty nights on the earth. And increasing are the waters, and lifting up the ark, and it is high above the earth.
And having the mastery are the waters and they are increasing exceedingly on the earth, and going is the ark on the surface of the water.
And the water has the mastery exceeding exceedingly on the earth. And covered are all the lofty mountains which are under the entire heavens.
Fifteen cubits above has the water the mastery, and covered are all the mountains.
And expiring is all flesh moving on the earth, of flyer, and of beast, and of living animal, and of every roaming animal roaming on the earth, and every human.
Everyone which has the breath of the spirit of the living in his nostrils, of all that were in the drained area, dies.
And wiped off is every risen thing which was on the surface of all the ground, from human to beast, from moving animal to the flyer of the heavens. And being wiped are they from the earth. Yea, only Noah is remaining, and what is with him in the ark.
And lofty are the waters on the earth a hundred and fifty days.
Now mindful is God of Noah and every living animal and every beast and every flyer and every moving animal which is with him in the ark. And God is causing a wind to pass over the earth, and subsiding are the waters.
And being held in check are the springs of the submerged chaos and the crevices of the heavens, and being shut up is the downpour from the heavens,
and returning are the waters off the earth, going and returning. And abating are the waters at the end of one hundred and fifty days.
And resting is the ark in the seventh month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, on the mountains of Ararat.
And the waters came to go and abate until the tenth month. In the eleventh month, on day one of the month, appear the heads of the mountains.
And it is coming, at the end of forty days, that opening is Noah a porthole of the ark which he had made,
and sending out is he a raven to see if the waters are slight. And forth is it faring, to fare forth and not to return till the drying of the water off the land.
And sending out is he a dove from him after it, to see if the waters are slight over the surface of the ground.
Yet not find does the dove a resting place for the sole of her foot, and she is returning to him to the ark, for the water is on the surface of the entire earth. And stretching forth is he his hand and taking her, and is bringing her to him into the ark.
And waiting is he further another seven days. And proceeding is he to send out the dove from the ark.
And coming is the dove to him at eventide, and behold! A torn-off olive leaf is in its beak! And knowing is Noah that the waters are slight above the earth.
And waiting is he further another seven days, and once more is sending out the dove, yet not any more to return to him further.
And coming is it, in the year six hundred and one of Noah's life, in the first month, on day one of the month, drained are the waters off the earth. And away is Noah taking the covering of the ark, which he had made, and seeing is he, and behold! Drained are the waters from the surface of the ground.
And in the second month on the twenty-seventh day of the month, the earth is dry.
And speaking is YHVH God to Noah, saying,
 "Fare forth from the ark, you, and your wife, and your sons, and your sons' wives with you.
And every living thing which is with you of all flesh, of flyer, and of beast, and of every moving animal moving on the earth, bring forth with you. They also are to roam in the earth, and to be fruitful, and increase on the earth."
And forth is faring Noah, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him.
And every living thing and every beast, and every flyer, and every moving animal moving on the earth, by their families they fare forth from the ark.
And building is Noah an altar to YHVH God, and taking is he of every clean beast, and of every clean flyer, and is offering up ascent offerings on the altar.
And smelling is YHVH God a restful smell. And saying is YHVH God to His heart, "Not any more will I slight further the ground for the sake of humanity, for the form of the human heart is evil from its youth. Neither again will I smite further all living flesh, as I have done.
In the future, all the days of the earth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and warmth, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease."
And blessing is God Noah and his sons. And saying is He to them, "Be fruitful and increase and fill the earth and subdue it.
 "And the fear of you and dismay due to you shall come on every living animal of the earth, even on every flyer of the heavens, and in all which is moving on the ground, and in all the fishes of the sea.
Into your hand are they given. "And every moving animal which is living is coming to be food for you. As the green herbage I give to you all.
 "Yea, only flesh with its soul, its blood, you shall not eat.
Yea, and your blood for your souls I will require. From the hand of every living animal will I require it, and from the hand of humanity. From the hand of a man's brother I will require the soul of a human.
 "The shedder of the blood of a human, by a human his blood shall be shed, for in the image of God has He made humanity.
 "And you, be fruitful, and increase, and roam in the earth and sway in it."
And speaking is God to Noah and to his sons with him, saying,
 "And I, behold Me setting up My covenant with you and with your seed after you
and with every living soul which is with you, with flyer and with beast and with all land life with you, with all faring forth from the ark, for all the land life.
And I set up My covenant with you, that not cut off shall all flesh be in the future by the waters of a deluge, neither will there come a future deluge of water to wreck the entire earth."
And saying is YHVH God to Noah, "This is the sign of the covenant which I am giving between Me and you and every living soul which is with you for generations eonian:
My bow I bestow in a cloud, and it comes to be for a sign of the covenant between Me and the earth.
And it comes, when I cloud over the earth with a cloud, then appears My bow in the cloud,
and I am reminded of My covenant, which is between Me and you and every living soul in all flesh, and there is not to come a future deluge of water to wreck all flesh.
And my bow comes in the cloud, and I see it, to be reminded of the covenant eonian between God and every living soul in all flesh which is on the earth."
And saying is God to Noah, "This is the sign of the covenant which I set up between Me and all flesh which is on the earth."
And the sons of Noah who fare forth from the ark are Shem and Ham and Japheth. (And Ham, he is the father of Canaan).
These three are sons of Noah, and from these the entire earth is scattered over.
And starting is Noah as a man who serves the ground, and planting is he a vineyard.
And drinking is he of the wine and is drunk, and is exposing himself in the midst of his tent.
And seeing is Ham (father of Canaan) the nakedness of his father, and faring forth, he is telling his two brothers outside.
And taking are Shem and Japheth a garment, and are placing it on the shoulders of the two, and they are going backward, and covering the nakedness of their father. And their faces were backward, and the nakedness of their father they did not see.
And waking is Noah from his wine, and he knows what his small son has done to him.
And saying is he, "Cursed be Canaan! A servant of servants shall he become for his brothers."
And saying is he, "Blessed be YHVH, God of Shem, and Canaan shall become his servant.
Entice will God Japheth, and tabernacle shall he in the tents of Shem. And become shall Canaan his servant."
And living is Noah after the deluge three hundred and fifty years.
And coming are all the days of Noah to be nine hundred and fifty years. And he died.
And these are the genealogical annals of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. And sons are being born to them after the deluge.
The sons of Japheth: Gomer and Magog and Media and Javan and Elisha, and Tubal and Meshech and Tiras.
And the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz and Riphas and Togarmah.
And the sons of Javan: Elishah and Tharshish, Kittim and Rodanim.
From these are parted the coastlanders of the nations among their lands, each man to his tongue, to their families, in their nations.
And the sons of Ham: Cush and Mizraim and Phut and Canaan.
And the sons of Cush: Sebah and Havilah and Sabtah and Raamah and Sabtechah. And the sons of Raamah: Sheba and Dedan.
And Cush generates Nimrod. He starts to become a master in the earth.
He becomes a master hunter before YHVH God. Therefore is it being said, "As Nimrod, the master hunter before YHVH."
And coming is the beginning of his kingdom to be Babel and Erech and Accad and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.
(From that land fares forth Ashur, and building is he Nineveh and Rehoboth city, and Calah,
and Desen between Nineveh and Calah. That city is great.)
And Mizraim generates Ludim and Anamim and Lehabim and Naphtuhim
and Pathrusim and Casluhim, whence fare forth the Philistim and Caphthorim.
And Canaan generates Sidon, his firstborn, and Heth
and the Jebusite and the Amorite and the Girgashite
and the Hivite and the Arkite and the Sinite
and the Arvadite and the Zemarite and the Hamathite. And afterwards the families of the Canaanite are scattered.
And coming is the boundary of the Canaanite to be from Sidon, as you come toward Gerar unto Gaza, as you come toward Sodom and Gomorrah and Admah and Zebolim, unto Lasha.
These are the sons of Ham, by their families, by their tongues, in their lands, in their nations.
And to Shem sons are born. Moreover, he is the forefather of all the sons of Eber. He is a brother of Japheth, the eldest.
The sons of Shem: Elam and Ashur, and Arphaxad and Lud and Aram and Cainan.
And the sons of Aram: Uz and Hul and Gether and Mash.
And Arphaxad generates Cainan and Cainan generates Shelach, and Shelach generates Eber.
And to Eber two sons are born. The name of one is Peleg, for in his days the land was distributed. And the name of his brother is Joktan.
And Joktan generates Almodad and Sheleph and Hazarmaveth and Jerah,
and Hadoram and Uzal and Diklah,
and Obal and Abimael and Sheba,
and Ophir and Havilah and Jobab. All these are sons of Joktan.
And coming is their dwelling to be from Mesha, till you come toward Sephar, a mountain of the east.
These are the sons of Shem, by their families, by their tongues, in their lands, by their nations.
These are the families of the sons of Noah, by their genealogical annals, in their nations. And from these the coastland nations are parted in the earth after the deluge.
Now coming is the entire earth to be of one lip, all of one speech.
And coming is it in their journey from the east, that they are finding a valley in the land of Shinar, and dwelling there are they.
And saying are they, each man to his associate, "Prithee! Let us mold bricks and burn them with a burning." And coming is the brick to be their stone, and asphalt becomes their mortar.
And saying are they, "Prithee! Build will we for ourselves a city and a tower with its head in the heavens, and make for ourselves a name, lest we are scattering over the surface of the entire earth."
And descending is YHVH to see the city and the tower which the sons of humanity build.
And saying is YHVH, "Behold! One people is it. And one lip is for them all. And this they started to do! And now nothing will be defended from them of all that they will plan to do.
Prithee! Descend will We, and there disintegrate their lip, that they may not hear each man the lip of his associate."
And scattering them is YHVH thence on the surface of the entire earth. And leaving off are they building the city and the tower.
Therefore its name is called Babel, for there YHVH disintegrates the lip of the entire earth. And thence YHVH God scatters them over the surface of the entire earth.
And these are the genealogical annals of Shem: Shem is a hundred years of age, and begetting is he Arphaxad two years after the deluge.
And living is Shem after his begetting Arphaxad five hundred years. And begetting is he sons and daughters. And he died.
And Arphaxad lives a hundred and thirty-five years, and he is begetting Cainan.
And living is Arphaxad after his begetting Cainan four hundred and three years. And begetting is he sons and daughters. And he died. And living is Cainan a hundred and thirty years, and begetting is he Shelach. And living is Cainan after his begetting Shelach three hundred and thirty years, and begetting is he sons and daughters. And he died.
And living is Shelach a hundred and thirty years and begetting is he Eber.
And living is Shelach after his begetting Eber three hundred and thirty years, and begetting is he sons and daughters. And he died.
And living is Eber a hundred and thirty-four years and begetting is he Peleg.
And living is Eber after his begetting Peleg two hundred and seventy years, and begetting is he sons and daughters. And he died.
And living is Peleg a hundred and thirty years and begetting is he Reu.
And living is Peleg after his begetting Reu two hundred and nine years, and begetting is he sons and daughters. And he died.
And living is Reu a hundred and thirty-two years, and begetting is he Serug.
And living is Reu after his begetting Serug two hundred and seven years, and begetting is he sons and daughters. And he died.
And living is Serug a hundred and thirty years, and begetting is he Nahor.
And living is Serug after his begetting Nahor two hundred years, and begetting is he sons and daughters. And he died.
And living is Nahor seventy-nine years, and begetting is he Terah.
And living is Nahor after his begetting Terah a hundred and twenty-nine years. And begetting is he sons and daughters. And he died.
And living is Terah seventy years, and begetting is he Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
And these are the genealogical annals of Terah: Terah begets Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and Haran begets Lot.
And Haran died in the presence of Terah, his father, in the land of his birth, in Ur of the Chaldeans.
And taking are Abram and Nahor to themselves wives. The name of Abram's wife is Sarai, and the name of Nahor's wife is Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah and the father of Iscah.
Yet coming is Sarai to be barren. No child is hers.
And taking is Terah Abram, his son, and Lot, the son of Haran, his son's son, and Sarai, his daughter-in-law, wife of Abram, his son, and faring forth is he with them from Ur of the Chaldeans, to go to the land of Canaan. And coming are they as far as Charan, and dwelling there are they.
And coming are all the days of Terah to be two hundred and five years. And dying is Terah in Charan.
Now saying is YHVH to Abram, "Go you from your land and from your kindred and from your father's house to the land which I shall show you.
And make you will I into a great nation, and bless you will I and make your name great, and become must you a blessing.
And bless those will I who bless you, and those making light of you will I curse. And blessed in you and in your seed are all the families of the ground."
And going is Abram as YHVH speaks to him. And going with him is Lot. And Abram was seventy-five years of age when he fares forth from Charan.
And taking is Abram Sarai, his wife, and Lot, his brother's son, and all their goods which they got, and every soul which they make their own in Charan, and forth are they faring to go toward the land of Canaan. And coming are they to the land of Canaan.
And passing is Abram into the land as far as the place of Shechem, as far as the high oak. And the Canaanite is then dwelling in the land.
And appearing is YHVH to Abram and is saying to him, "To your seed am I giving this land." And building is Abram there an altar to YHVH, Who appeared to him.
And shifting is he thence toward the mountain on the east of Beth-El, and there is stretching out his tent, with Beth-El on the seaward side, and Ai on the east, and building is he there an altar to YHVH. And calling is he on the name of YHVH.
And journeying goes Abram. And the journey is toward the south-rim.
And coming is a famine in the land. And down is Abram going to Egypt to sojourn there, for heavy is the famine in the land.
And coming is it, as Abram nears to come to Egypt, that saying is Abram to Sarai, his wife, "Behold, pray! I know that a woman of lovely appearance are you,
and when it comes that the Egyptians see you and say, `His wife is this,' then they will kill me, yet you they will keep alive.
Say, pray, that my sister are you, that it may be well with me for your sake, and live may my soul due to you."
And coming is it, as Abram comes to Egypt, that the Egyptians see the woman, that very lovely is she.
Seeing her also are the chiefs of Pharaoh, and they praise her to Pharaoh, and the woman is being taken to Pharaoh's house.
And to Abram is he good for her sake. And coming is he to have a flock and a very heavy herd of cattle and asses and menservants and maids and jenny-asses and camels.
And touching is YHVH God Pharaoh with contagions, great and evil, also his household, in the matter of Sarai, Abram's wife.
And calling is Pharaoh to Abram and is saying, "What is this you do to me? Why did you not tell me that she is your wife?
Why did you say, My sister is she? And I am taking her to me for a wife! And now, behold your wife before you. Take her and go."
And instructing is Pharaoh the mortals concerning Abram. And sending him away are they, his wife and all that is his, and Lot with him.
And up is Abram going from Egypt, he and his wife and all that is his, and Lot with him, to the south-rim.
And Abram is very heavy in cattle, in silver, and in gold.
And going is he, in his journeyings from the south-rim, as far as Beth-El, as far as the place where his tent came to be at the start, between Beth-El and Ai,
to the place of the altar, which he made there at the first. And there calling is Abram on the name of YHVH.
And moreover, Lot who is going with Abram, comes to have a flock and a herd and tents.
And not bearing is the land their dwelling together, for coming are their goods to be many and they cannot dwell together.
And coming is a contention between the graziers of Abram's cattle and the graziers of Lot's cattle. And the Canaanite and the Perizzite are then dwelling in the land.
And saying is Abram to Lot, "There must not, pray, come to be contention between me and you, and between my graziers and your graziers, for mortals, brethren are we.
Is not the entire land before you? Be parted, pray, from me. If to the left, to the right will I go. And if to the right, to the left will I go.
And lifting is Lot his eyes and is seeing all the basin of the Jordan, for all of it was irrigated before YHVH wrecked Sodom and Gomorrah, as the garden of YHVH God, as the land of Egypt as you come to Zoar.
And choosing is Lot for his all the basin of the Jordan. And journeying is Lot east. And being parted are they, each man from his brother.
Abram dwells in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwells in the cities of the basin. And tenting is he as far as Sodom.
Now the mortals of Sodom are evil and sinners against YHVH God exceedingly.
And YHVH God says to Abram after Lot was parted from him, "Lift your eyes, pray, and see. From the place where you now are, northward and toward the south-rim and eastward and seaward,
for all the land which you are seeing, to you am I giving it, and to your seed, till the eon.
And I make your seed as the soil of the land. Could a man count the soil of the land, moreover, then your seed shall be counted.
Rise, walk in the land, its length and its width, for to you am I giving it, and to your seed, for the eon."
And tenting is Abram, and coming and dwelling among the oaks of Mamre, which are in Hebron. And building is he there an altar to YHVH.
And coming is it in the days of the reign of Amraphel, king of Shinar, and Arioch, king of Ellasar, and Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, and Tidal, king of nations,
that they make war with Bera, king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, and Shinab, king of Admah, and Shemeber, king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela. (It is now Zoar.)
All these are joined at the vale of the salt fields. (It is now the salt sea.)
Twelve years they serve Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year they revolt.
And in the fourteenth year comes Chedorlaomer, and the kings which are with him, and smiting are they the Rephaim in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the strong nations with them and the Emim in Shaveh towns,
and the Horites in the mountains of Seir, as far as the terebinth of Paran, which is at the wilderness.
And returning are they and coming to En-Mishphat (It is now Kadesh). And smiting are they all the chiefs of the Amalekites and, moreover, the Amorites dwelling in Hazezon-tamar.
And forth is faring the king of Sodom and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah and the king of Zeboiim and the king of Bela (It is now Zoar). And arranging themselves are they for battle in the vale of the salt fields,
with Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, and Tidal, king of nations, and Amraphel, king of Shinar, and Arioch, king of Ellasar four kings with five.
And the vale of salt fields had wells, asphalt wells. And fleeing are the king of Sodom and the king of Gomorrah, and falling are they there, and the remainder flee toward the mountain.
And taking are they all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah and all their food, and are going.
And taking are they Lot, Abram's brother's son, and all his goods, for he was dwelling in Sodom, and they are going.
And coming is one who was delivered, and he is telling Abram, the Hebrew. Now he is tabernacling among the oaks of Mamre, the Amorite, brother of Eshcol and brother of Aner. And they are possessors of a covenant with Abram.
And hearing is Abram that Lot, his brother, is captured. And numbering is he those dedicated to him, born in his household, three hundred and eighteen, and is pursuing them as far as Dan.
And, being apportioned, falling is his force on them by night, he and his servants. And smiting them is he, and pursuing them as far as Hobah, which is to the left of Damascus.
And restoring is he all the goods of Sodom, and, moreover, he restored Lot, his brother, and his goods, and moreover, the women and the people.
And forth is faring the king of Sodom to meet him, after his return from smiting Chedorlaomer and the kings who were with him, at the vale Shaveh (It is now the vale of the king).
And Melchizedek, king of Salem, brings forth bread and wine.
And he is a priest for the El Supreme. And blessing is he Abram, and is saying, "Blessed is Abram by the El Supreme, Owner of the heavens and the earth.
And blessed is the El Supreme, Who awards your foes into your hands." And giving is he to him tithes from all.
And saying is the king of Sodom to Abram, "Give to me the souls, yet the goods you take."
And saying is Abram to the king of Sodom, "High hold I my hand to swear to YHVH, the El Supreme, Owner of the heavens and the earth.
If it be more than a thread or even a sandal lacing, or if taking am I from anything which is yours, then will you not say, `I enrich Abram'?
But, apart is this from what the lads eat, and the portion of the mortals who went with me: Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre. They shall take their portion.
After these matters came the word of YHVH to Abram in a vision, saying, "You must not fear, Abram! I am your Shield, your exceedingly increased Hire."
And saying is Abram, "My Lord YHVH, what are You giving to me, when I am going heirless, and the son running about my house, he is Damascus Eliezer?"
And saying is Abram, "Behold! To me no seed have You given. And behold! A son of my household is to enjoy my tenancy."
And, behold! The word of YHVH comes to him, saying, "Not this one is to enjoy your tenancy, but rather one who shall fare forth from your bowels, he is to enjoy your tenancy."
And forth is he bringing him outside and saying, "Look, pray, toward the heavens and number the stars, if you can number them." And saying is He to him, "Thus shall your seed become."
And Abram believes in YHVH God, and reckoning it is He to him for righteousness.
And saying is He to him, "I am YHVH God Who brought you forth from Ur of the Chaldeans, to give to you this land to tenant it."
And saying is he, "My Lord YHVH, whereby am I to know that I am to enjoy its tenancy?"
And saying is He to him, "Take for Me a heifer in her third year, and a goat in her third year, and a ram in his third year, and a turtledove, and a fledgling."
And taking is he for Him all these and sundering them is he in the midst, and is putting each sundered part to meet its associate.
Yet the birds he did not sunder. And descending are the birds of prey on the severed cadavers, yet Abram is sitting by and turning them back.
And, at the coming of the setting of the sun, a stupor falls on Abram. And, behold! The dread of a great darkness is falling on him.
And saying is He to Abram, "Knowing, yea, knowing are you that a sojourner is your seed to become in a land not theirs, and they are to serve them. Yet evil shall they do to them and humiliate them four hundred years.
Moreover, also, the nation which they are serving will I adjudicate. And afterward they are to fare forth hither with great goods.
Yet you shall come to your forefathers in peace, and be entombed at a good grey-haired age.
And in the fourth generation they shall return hither, for the depravity of the Amorites has not been repaid hitherto."
When the sun comes to set, and twilight comes, then, behold, a smoking stove, and a torch of fire which passes between these severed parts.
In that day YHVH contracted a covenant with Abram, saying, "To your seed I give this land, from the stream of Egypt as far as the great stream, the stream Euphrates,
the Cainite and the Kenizite and the Kadmonite
and the Hittite and the Perizzite and the Rephaim
and the Amorite and the Canaanite and the Hivite and the Girgashite and the Jebusite."
Now Sarai, the wife of Abram, does not bear for him. Yet an Egyptian maid has she and her name is Hagar.
And saying is Sarai to Abram, "Behold, pray! YHVH restrains me from bearing. Come, pray, to my maid. Perhaps I will be built by her." And hearkening is Abram to the voice of Sarai.
And taking is Sarai, the wife of Abram, Hagar, the Egyptian, her maid, at the end of ten years of Abram's dwelling in the land of Canaan, and giving her is she to Abram, her husband, for his wife.
And coming is he to Hagar, and pregnant is she becoming. And seeing is she that she is pregnant, and lightly esteemed is her mistress in her eyes.
And saying is Sarai to Abram, "My wrong comes on you. I, I gave my maid into your bosom. And seeing is she that she is pregnant, and lightly esteemed am I in her eyes. Judging is YHVH God between me and her."
And saying is Abram to Sarai, "Behold, your maid is in your hands. Do to her what is good in your eyes." And Sarai is humiliating her, and away is she running from her face.
And finding her is a messenger of YHVH at a spring of water in the wilderness, at a spring on the way of the barricade.
And saying to her is the messenger of YHVH, "Hagar, maid of Sarai, whence come you and whither are you going?" And saying is she, "From the face of Sarai, my mistress, am I running away."
And saying to her is the messenger of YHVH, "Return to your mistress and humble yourself under her hands."
And saying to her is the messenger of YHVH, "Verily, I am increasing your seed, and not shall it be numbered for multitude."
And saying to her is the messenger of YHVH, "Behold! Pregnant are you, bearing a son, and you are to call his name Ishmael, for YHVH hears of your humiliation.
And becoming is he a wild ass of a human, his hand against all, and the hand of all against him. And adjoining all his brethren will he tabernacle."
And calling is Hagar the name of YHVH Who spoke to her, "You-El-see me." For she says, "Moreover, hither see I, after my seeing?"
Therefore she calls the well "Bar-lechi-rai." Behold! It is between Kadesh and Bered.
And bearing is Hagar for Abram a son, and Abram is calling the name of his son which Hagar bears for him, Ishmael.
And Abram is eighty six years of age when Hagar bears Ishmael for Abram.
And coming is Abram to be ninety nine years of age. And appearing is YHVH to Abram and is saying to him, "I am the El-Who-Suffices. Walk before Me and become flawless.
 "And giving am I My covenant between Me and you, and increasing am I you exceedingly exceedingly."
And falling is Abram on his face.
And speaking with him is God, saying, "I, behold! My covenant is with you. And you are to become the forefather of a throng of nations.
And no further shall your name be called Abram. Yet your name becomes Abraham, for the forefather of a throng of nations have I made you.
And fruitful I cause you to be exceedingly exceedingly. And I make of you nations, and kings from you shall fare forth.
And I set up My covenant between Me and you, and your seed after you, for their generations, for a covenant eonian, to become your God and your seed's after you.
And I give to you and to your seed after you the land of your sojournings, all the land of Canaan, for a holding eonian. And I become their God.
And saying is God to Abraham, "And you shall keep My covenant, you and your seed after you for their generations.
This is My covenant, which you shall keep between Me and you and your seed after you for their generations: Circumcise to yourselves every male.
And circumcised shall you be in the flesh of your foreskin. And it comes to be for a sign of the covenant between Me and you.
And a son of eight days shall be circumcised by you, every male of your generations, homeborn or acquired with money from any foreigner, he who is not of your seed.
With circumcision shall be circumcised the homeborn and the one acquired with your money. And My covenant comes to be in your flesh for a covenant eonian.
And the uncircumcised male, the flesh of whose foreskin was not circumcised in the eighth day, that soul also shall be cut off from his people. My covenant he annuls."
And saying is God to Abraham, "Sarai, your wife you shall not call her name Sarai, for Sarah is her name.
And I bless her, and, moreover, I give you a son of her. And bless him will I and he comes to be for nations, and kings of peoples shall come from him."
Then falling is Abraham on his face. And laughing is he and saying in his heart, "To one a hundred years of age shall a son be born? And should Sarah, ninety years of age, be bearing?"
And saying is Abraham to God, "O that Ishmael should live before You!"
And saying is God to Abraham, "Nevertheless, behold, Sarah, your wife is bearing you a son, and you shall call his name Isaac. And I set up My covenant with him for a covenant eonian, and with his seed after him.
 "And as to Ishmael, behold! I hear you. Behold! Bless him do I, and fruitful do I make him, and increase him exceedingly exceedingly. Twelve princes shall he beget, and I make of him a great nation.
 "Yet My covenant will I set up with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear for you at this, the appointed time another year."
And finishing is He speaking with him, and ascending is God from Abraham.
And taking is Abraham Ishmael, his son, and all who are born in his household, and all acquired with his money, every male among the mortals of Abraham's household, and he is circumcising the flesh of their foreskin on this very day, as God had spoken to him.
And Abraham is ninety nine years of age at his circumcision in the flesh of his foreskin.
And Ishmael, his son, is thirteen years of age at his circumcision in the flesh of his foreskin.
On this very day is Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael, his son.
And all the mortals of his household, home-born or acquired with money from a foreigner of the nations, are circumcised with him.
And appearing to him is YHVH God among the oaks of Mamre. And sitting is he at the opening of the tent at noon, as the day is warm.
And lifting is he his eyes and seeing, and behold! Three mortals are stationed by him. And seeing is he and running to meet them from the opening of the tent, and is prostrating to the earth.
And saying is he, "My lord, pray, should I find grace in your eyes, pray, you must not pass on from your servant.
Let a little water, pray, be taken, and they will wash your feet. And lean back under the tree.
And I will take a morsel of bread and you shall eat and brace your hearts. And afterward shall you pass on your way, for therefore you pass by your servant." And saying are they, "So be doing as you speak."
And hastening is Abraham toward the tent to Sarah. And saying is he to her, "Hasten! Three seahs of meal flour knead, and make ember cakes."
And to the herd runs Abraham, and is taking a young one of the herd, tender and good, and is giving it to the lad. And hastening is he to make it ready.
And taking is he clotted cream and milk, and the young one of the herd which he had made ready, and he is putting it before them. And he is standing by them under the tree, and eating are they.
And saying are they to him, "Where is Sarah, your wife?" And answering, he is saying, "Behold! In the tent."
And saying is He, "Return, yea, return will I to you according to this season of life, and, behold! A son has Sarah, your wife." And Sarah is hearing at the opening of the tent, for she was behind him.
Now Abraham and Sarah are old, coming into days. It had left off to come to Sarah, according to the path of women.
And laughing is Sarah within herself saying, "After my decadence shall luxury come to me? It has not come to me till now. My lord also is old."
And saying is YHVH to Abraham, "Why this? Sarah laughs, saying, `Indeed, truly, shall I bear when I am old?'
Is it a matter too marvelous for YHVH God? At the appointed time will I return to you according to the season of life, and Sarah has a son."
Then dissimulating is Sarah, saying, "Not laugh did I," for she is fearful. And saying is He, "No! For laugh did you."
And rising are the mortals thence, and they are gazing on the face of Sodom and Gomorrah. And Abraham is going with them to send them away.
And YHVH says, "Shall I cover from Abraham, My servant, what I am doing,
when Abraham shall become, yea become a nation, great and staunch, and blessed in him are all the nations of the earth?
For I know him, that, responding, he will instruct his sons and his household after him, and keep will they the way of YHVH to do justice and judgment, that YHVH may bring on Abraham all that He speaks concerning him."
And saying is YHVH, "Seeing that the outcry of Sodom and Gomorrah is much, and that their sin is exceedingly heavy,
descend will I, pray, and see, do they according to all the cry which is coming to Me? And if not, I will know."
And facing thence are the mortals, and they are going to Sodom. And YHVH still is standing before Abraham.
And close is Abraham coming and saying, "Indeed, sweeping up are You the righteous with the wicked? So become the righteous as the wicked.
Perhaps, forsooth, fifty righteous are there in the midst of the city. Indeed, sweeping them up are You and not bearing with the entire place on account of the fifty righteous who are within it?
Far be it from You to do according to this word, to put to death the righteous with the wicked, and so come the righteous to be as the wicked. Far be it from You! The Judge of the entire earth, will He not execute judgment?"
And saying is YHVH, "If finding am I in Sodom fifty righteous in the midst of the city, then bear will I with the entire place for their sake."
And answering is Abraham and saying, "Behold, pray! Disposed am I to speak to YHVH, and I am but soil and ashes.
Perhaps lacking are the fifty righteous, five. Ruin wilt You, for five the entire city?" And saying is He, "Not ruin it will I if I shall find there forty five."
And proceeding is he further to speak to Him and saying, "Perhaps will be found there forty." And saying is He, "Not do it will I for the sake of the forty."
And saying is he, "My Lord must not, pray, be hot when I speak. Perhaps will be found there thirty." And saying is He, "Not do it will I if I shall find there thirty."
And saying is he, "Behold, pray! Disposed am I to speak to my Lord. Perhaps will be found there twenty." And saying is He, "Not ruin it will I, for the sake of the twenty."
And saying is he, "My Lord must not, pray, be hot, when I shall speak, yea, once more. Perhaps will be found there ten." And saying is He, "Not ruin it will I, for the sake of the ten."
And going is YHVH, as He finishes speaking to Abraham. And Abraham returns to his place.
And coming are two of the messengers to Sodom in the evening. And Lot is sitting in the gateway of Sodom. And seeing them is Lot, and rising is he to meet them. And prostrating is he, nostrils to the earth.
And saying is he, "Behold, pray, my lords! Withdraw, pray, to the house of your servant and lodge and wash your feet, and rise early and go on your way." And saying are they, "No, for in the square will we lodge."
And urging them is he exceedingly. And withdrawing are they to him, and coming to his house. And making is he for them a feast, and he bakes unleavened bread, and they are eating.
Ere they are lying down, then mortals of the city, mortals of Sodom, surround the house, from the lad even unto the elder, the entire people, from the outmost parts.
And calling are they to Lot, and saying to him, "Where are the mortals who came to you tonight? Bring them forth to us, and we will know them."
And forth to them is Lot faring, to the portal, yet the door he closes after him.
And saying is he to them, "Pray, you must not, my brethren, do evil!
Behold, pray, my two daughters who have not known a man. Pray, forth will I bring them to you, and do you to them as is good in your eyes. But to these mortals you must not do anything evil, for therefore come they into the shadow of my rafters."
Yet saying are they, "Come close you, beyond." And saying are they, "The one who came to sojourn is judging, even as a judge! Now we will do more evil to you than to them." And urging are they the man Lot exceedingly, and close are they coming to break the door.
And stretching forth are the mortals their hands and bringing Lot to them into the house, and the door they close.
And the mortals who are at the portal of the house they smite with dazzlings, from the small to the great, so they are tiring themselves trying to find the portal.
And saying are the mortals to Lot, "Still any of yours here, sons-in-law, or your sons or your daughters, all who are yours in the city, bring forth from this place,
for ruining are we this place, for great is the cry concerning them before the face of YHVH, and sending us is YHVH to wreck it."
And forth is Lot faring, and is speaking to his sons-in-law, who took his daughters, and is saying. "Rise! Forth from this place, for ruining is YHVH the city!" And becoming is he as one making fun, in the eyes of his sons-in law.
And as dawn ascends, then rushing are the messengers Lot, saying, "Rise! Take your wife and your two daughters, who are found, and come out, lest you be swept up in the depravity of the city."
Yet dallying is he, and fast hold are the mortals taking of his hand and the hand of his wife and the hands of his two daughters, at YHVH's sparing him. And forth are they bringing him, and leaving him outside the city.
And coming is it, as they bring them forth outside. They are saying also, "Be sure to escape with your soul! You must not look behind you, and you must not stand in any part of the basin. Escape to the mountain, lest you be swept up!"
And saying is Lot to them. "It must not be, pray, YHVH!
Behold, pray! Your servant finds grace in Your eyes, and magnifying are You Your kindness which You do to me in preserving alive my soul. Yet I, I cannot escape to the mountain, lest evil cling to me and I die.
Behold, pray! This city is near to flee there, and it is inferior. Pray, escape shall I there Is it not inferior? and live shall my soul."
And saying is He to him, "Behold! Lifted up have I your face, even as to this matter, to avoid My overturning the city of which you speak.
Hasten! Escape there, for not a thing can I do till you come there." Therefore he calls the name of the city Zoar.
The sun comes forth over the earth when Lot comes to Zoar.
And YHVH rains on Sodom and on Gomorrah sulphur and fire from YHVH, from the heavens.
And overturning is He these cities and the entire basin, and all dwelling in the cities and everything sprouting from the ground.
Yet looking back is his wife from behind him, and becoming is she a monument of salt.
And early is Abraham rising in the morning to go to the place where he had stood before the face of YHVH.
And gazing is he on the surface of Sodom and Gomorrah and on all the surface of the land of the basin, and is seeing, and behold! Up go the fumes of the land as the fumes of a limekiln.
And coming is it, as YHVH God wrecks all the cities of the basin, remembering also is God Abraham and is sending Lot from the midst of the overturning when YHVH overturns the cities in which Lot dwelt.
And up is Lot going from Zoar, and dwelling in the mountain, and his two daughters with him, for he fears to dwell in Zoar. And dwelling is he in a cave, he and his two daughters with him.
And saying is the firstborn to the inferior in station, "Our father is old, and man there is none in the earth to come on us as is the way of the entire earth.
Go! Give will we our father wine to drink, and lie with him and keep alive seed from our father."
And giving are they their father wine to drink in that night. And coming is the firstborn, and lying with her father in that night, and he knows not her lying nor her rising.
And coming is it on the morrow that the firstborn is saying to the inferior in station, "Behold! I lay yesternight with our father. We will give him wine to drink tonight, moreover. And you come, lie with him, and we will keep alive seed from our father."
And, moreover, they are giving their father wine to drink in that night, and rising is the inferior in station, and is lying with her father. And he knows not her lying nor her rising.
And pregnant are the two daughters of Lot by their father.
And bearing is the firstborn a son, and is calling his name Moab, saying, "From my father." He is the forefather of Moab till this day.
And the inferior in station, she, moreover, bears a son, and is calling his name Ben-Ammi. He is the forefather of the sons of Ammon till this day.
And journeying thence is Abraham to the south-rim. And dwelling is he between Kadesh and Shur, and is sojourning in Gerar.
And saying is Abraham concerning Sarah, his wife, "My sister is she," for he feared to say, "My wife is she," lest he be killed by the men of the city because of her. And sending is Abimelech, king of Gerar, and taking Sarah.
And coming is God to Abimelech in a dream in the night, and is saying to him, "Behold yourself dying on account of the woman whom you take, when she is possessed by a possessor."
And Abimelech comes not near to her. And saying is he, "YHVH, a nation, moreover, unknowing and just, are you killing?
Said not he to me, `My sister is she'? And she, moreover, said, `My brother is he.' In the sincerity of my heart and in the innocency of my palms, I did this."
And saying is God to him in the dream, "Moreover, I know that, in the sincerity of your heart you did this, and I, moreover, am keeping you back from sinning against Me. Therefore, I did not allow you to touch her.
And now restore the man's wife, for a prophet is he, and pray will he about you, and live shall you. And should you not restore her, know that you shall die, yea, die, you and all who are yours."
And early is Abimelech rising in the morning, and calling is he all his servants, and is speaking all these words in their ears. And fearing are all the mortals exceedingly.
And calling is Abimelech to Abraham, and saying to him, "What have you done to us? And in what have I sinned against you, that you bring on me and on my kingdom a great sin? Deeds which are not being done you do to me."
And saying is Abimelech to Abraham, "What do you see that you have done this thing?"
And saying is Abraham, "For I feared seeing that I say, `But no fear of God is in this place, and they will kill me over the matter of my wife.'
And, moreover, truly, my sister is she, the daughter of my father is she, yea, but not the daughter of my mother, and she becomes my wife.
And it comes, as God causes me to stray from my father's house and from the land of my kindred, that I am saying to her, "This is your kindness which you shall do for me. At every place where we are coming, say as to me, "My brother is he".'"
And taking is Abimelech a thousand silverlings and a flock and a herd, and servants and maids, and is giving them to Abraham. And he is restoring to him Sarah his wife.
And saying is Abimelech to Abraham, "Behold! My land is before you. In that which is good in your eyes, dwell."
And to Sarah he says, "Behold! I gave a thousand silverlings to your brother. Behold! It is for you a covering of the eyes and for all who are with you. All is being corrected also."
And praying is Abraham to God and healing is God Abimelech and his wife and his maidservants, and they are bearing,
for YHVH restrains, yea restrains all the wombs of the house of Abimelech over the matter of Sarah, Abraham's wife.
And YHVH visits Sarah, as He had said, and doing is YHVH to Sarah as He had spoken.
And pregnant is Sarah and is bearing for Abraham a son for his old age, at the appointed time of which God had spoken to him.
And Abraham is calling the name of his son who is born to him, whom Sarah bears for him, Isaac.
And circumcising is Abraham Isaac, his son, at eight days of age as God had instructed him.
And Abraham is a hundred years of age when his son Isaac is born to him.
And saying is Sarah, "Laughter God makes for me. Everyone hearing is laughing for me."
And saying is she, "Who declared to Abraham, `Sarah suckles sons'? For I bear him a son in my old age."
And growing up is the boy and being weaned. And making is Abraham a great feast on the day of the weaning of Isaac, his son.
And seeing is Sarah the son of Hagar, the Egyptian, whom she bore for Abraham, making fun of Isaac her son.
And saying is she to Abraham, "Drive out this maidservant an her son, for not shall he enjoy the tenancy the son of this maidservant with my son, with Isaac!"
Yet evil is this word exceedingly in the eyes of Abraham, on account of his son's case.
And saying is God to Abraham, "Let it not be evil in your eyes on account of the lad, and on account of your maidservant. In all that Sarah is saying to you, hearken to her voice, for in Isaac your seed shall be called.
And moreover, the son of this maidservant, a great nation I will constitute him, for your seed is he."
And early in the morning Abraham is rising, and taking bread and a flask of water and is giving it to Hagar, and places it on her shoulder, with the boy, and is sending her away. And going is she and straying in the wilderness of Beer-sheba.
And finishing are they the water from the flask. And flinging is she the boy under one of the shrubs.
And going is she and sitting by herself, aloof from him, far off as a bow shot, for, she says, "I must not see the death of my boy." And sitting is she aloof from him. And the lad is lifting up his voice and lamenting.
And hearing is God the voice of the lad from the place where he is. And calling is a messenger of God to Hagar from the heavens and is saying to her, "What is the matter with you, Hagar? You must not fear, for God hears the voice of your lad from the place where he is.
Rise! Lift up the lad, and encourage your hand in him, for a great nation will I constitute him."
And unclosing is God her eyes, and seeing is she a well of living water, and is going and filling the flask with water, and giving the lad a drink.
And coming is it that God is with the lad, and he is growing up. And dwelling is he in the wilderness, and becoming great with his bow.
And dwelling is he in the wilderness of Paran. And his mother is taking a wife for him from the land of Egypt.
And coming is it at that season that Abimelech with Ahuzzath, his associate, and Phicol, the chief of his host, is speaking to Abraham, saying, "God is with you in all that you are doing.
And now, swear to me by God. Behold! Should you be false to me and to my propagator and to my progeny ! According to the kindness which I do to you shall you do with me, and with the land in which you sojourn."
And saying is Abraham, "I will swear."
Yet Abraham corrected Abimelech on account of the case of a well of water which had been snatched by the servants of Abimelech.
And saying is Abimelech to him, "Not know do I who did this thing. And, moreover, you did not tell me. Moreover, also I did not hear, barring today."
And taking is Abraham a flock and a herd, and is giving them to Abimelech. And they two are contracting a covenant.
And stationing is Abraham seven ewe lambs of the flock alone.
And saying is Abimelech to Abraham, "What are they, these seven ewe lambs of the flock which you station alone?"
And saying is Abraham, that "The seven ewe lambs are you taking from my hand in order to become a testimony to me that I delved this well."
Therefore he called the name of that place Beer-sheba, for there they swore, they two.
And contracting are they a covenant in Beer-sheba. And rising is Abimelech and Ahuzzath, his associate, and Phicol, the chief of his host, and returning are they to the land of the Philistines.
And planting is Abraham a tamarisk in Beer-sheba, and is calling there on the name of YHVH, the El eonian.
And sojourning is Abraham in the land of the Philistines many days.
And it is coming, after these things, that God probes Abraham and is saying to him, "Abraham! Abraham!" And saying is he, "Behold me!"
And saying is He, "Take, pray, your son, your only one, whom you love, Isaac, and go you to the land of Moriah, and offer him up there for an ascent offering on one of the mountains of which I will apprize you."
And early in the morning is Abraham rising, and is saddling his ass, and is taking two of his lads with him, and Isaac, his son, and is rending the wood for the ascent offering. And rising is he and going, and came to the place of which God apprized him on the third day.
And lifting up his eyes is Abraham and seeing the place from afar.
And saying is Abraham to his lads, "Sit you here with the ass, and I and the lad will go, meanwhile, and we will worship and return to you."
And taking is Abraham the wood for the ascent offering and is placing it on Isaac, his son. And taking is he in his hand the fire and the knife. And going are they two together.
And speaking is Isaac to Abraham, his father, and saying, "My father!" And saying is he, "Behold me, my son." And saying is he, "Behold the fire and the wood, yet where is the flockling for the ascent offering?"
And saying is Abraham, "God will see for Himself as to the flockling for the ascent offering, my son."
And going are they, they two, together. And coming are they to the place of which God had apprized him. And building is Abraham the altar there, and is arranging the wood. And trussing is he Isaac, his son, and placing him on the altar, above the wood.
And stretching out is Abraham his hand and taking the knife to slay his son.
And calling is the messenger of YHVH to him from the heavens and saying, "Abraham! Abraham!" And saying is he, "Behold me!"
And saying is he, "You must not stretch out your hand on the lad, and you must not do aught to him, for now I know that you fear God, for you have not kept back your son, your only one from Me."
And lifting is Abraham his eyes and seeing, and behold! One ram is behind him, held in a thicket by its horns. And going is Abraham and taking the ram, and offering it up for an ascent offering instead of Isaac, his son.
And calling is Abraham the name of that place YHVH-jireh, which is being said today, "In the mount of YHVH it is being seen."
And calling is the messenger of YHVH to Abraham a second time from the heavens, and saying,
 "By Myself I swear, averring is YHVH, that, because you have done this thing and have not kept back your son, your only one, from Me,
that, blessing, yea, blessing you am I, and increasing, yea, increasing your seed am I as the stars of the heavens and as the sand which is on the sea shore. And your seed shall tenant the gateway of its enemies,
and blessed, in your seed, shall be all the nations of the earth, inasmuch as you hearken to My voice."
And returning is Abraham to his lads. And rising are they and going together to Beer-sheba. And dwelling is Abraham in Beer-sheba.
And coming is it, after these things, that it is being told to Abraham, saying, "Behold! Milcah, she, moreover, bears sons for Nahor, your brother,
Uz, his firstborn, and Buz, his brother, and Kemuel, the father of Aram,
and Chesed and Hazu and Pildash and Jidlaph and Bethuel.
And Bethuel generates Rebecca. These eight sons Milcah bears for Nahor, the brother of Abraham.
And his concubine, and her name is Reumah, she moreover, also is bearing Tebah and Gaham and Thahash and Maachah."
And coming is the life of Sarah to be a hundred and twenty seven years the years of the life of Sarah.
And dying is Sarah in the town of Arba, in the vale. (It is Hebron, in the land of Canaan.) And coming is Abraham to wail over Sarah and to lament for her.
And rising is Abraham from over the face of his dead. And speaking is he to the sons of Heth, saying,
 "A sojourner and a settler am I with you. Give me a holding for a tomb with you, and I will entomb my dead from my face."
And the sons of Heth are answering Abraham, saying, "No!
Hear us, my lord! A prince of God are you in our midst. In the choice of our tombs entomb your dead. Not a man of us will forbid the use of his tomb from you to entomb your dead there."
And rising is Abraham and bowing down to the people of the land, to the sons of Heth.
And speaking is Abraham with them, saying, "Should it forsooth, please your soul to entomb my dead from my face, hear me, and intercede for me with Ephron, the son of Zohar, the Hittite,
that he shall give to me the double cave which is his, which is at the end of his field. For silver, in full, shall he give it to me for a holding for a tomb in your midst."
And Ephron is sitting in the midst of the sons of Heth. And answering is Ephron, the Hittite, Abraham in the ears of the sons of Heth, to all entering the gateway of his city, saying,
 "No, my lord! Hear me! The field I give to you. And the cave which is in it, to you I give it. Before the eyes of the sons of all my people I give it to you. Entomb your dead."
And bowing down is Abraham before the people of the land.
And speaking is he to Ephron in the ears of the people of the land, saying, "Yea, should you be for me, hear me! Give will I silver for the field. Take it from me and I will entomb my dead there."
And answering is Ephron Abraham, saying,
 "No lord! Hear me. The land is four hundred shekels of silver. What is that between me and you? Your dead entomb."
And hearkening is Abraham to Ephron. And weighing is Abraham for Ephron the silver of which he spoke in the ears of the sons of Heth, for hundred shekels of silver, passing with the merchant.
And confirmed is the field of Ephron in which is the double cave, which is adjoining Mamre, the field and the cave which is in it, and all the trees which are in the field, which are in all its boundary around,
to Abraham by acquisition, before the eyes of the sons of Heth to all entering the gateway of his city.
And afterward Abraham entombs Sarah, his wife, at the double cave of the field adjoining Mamre. (It is Hebron, in the land of Canaan.)
And confirmed is the field and the cave which is in it to Abraham for a holding for a tomb from the sons of Heth.
And Abraham is old, come to days. And YHVH blesses Abraham in all things.
And saying is Abraham to his servant, the oldest of his household, the ruler over all that is his, "Pray place your hand under my thigh,
and adjure you will I by YHVH, God of the heavens and God of the earth, that you will not take a wife for my son Isaac from the daughters of the Canaanite near whom I am dwelling,
for to my land whence I came, and to my kindred should you go, and take a wife for my son, for Isaac, thence."
And saying to him is the servant, "Perhaps the woman will not be willing to go after me to this land. Shall I restore, yea restore your son to the land whence you fared forth?"
And saying to him is Abraham, "Beware you, lest you restore my son thither!
YHVH, God of the heavens and God of the earth, Who took me from my father's household and from the land of my kindred, whence I came, and Who spoke to me, and Who swore to me, saying, `To you and your seed will I give this land,' He will send His messenger before you, and you take a wife for my son, Isaac, thence.
And should the woman not be willing to go after you to this land, innocent are you of this my oath, but my son you shall not restore thither."
And placing is the servant his hand under the thigh of Abraham, his lord, and is swearing to him on account of this matter.
And taking is the servant ten camels from the camels of his lord, and is going. And all manner of good things of his lord are in his hand. And rising is he and going to Syria of the streams, to the city of Nahor.
And causing is he the camels to kneel outside the city at a well of water at eventide, the time the women fare forth to bail it.
And saying is he, "YHVH, God of my lord Abraham, pray, cause a meeting before me today, and do a kindness to my lord Abraham.
Behold! I am stationed at this spring of water, and the daughters of the mortals of the city will fare forth to bail water.
And comes it that the maiden to whom I will say, `Pray stretch out your jar and give me a drink,' says to me, `Drink. And moreover, your camels also will I give to drink till they should finish drinking', that her You do find correct for Your servant, for Isaac, and by it will I know that You do a kindness to my lord Abraham."
And coming is it, ere he finishes speaking in his heart, that behold! Rebecca is faring forth, who was born to Bethuel, the son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, and her jar is on her shoulder.
And the maiden is of exceedingly good appearance, a virgin, and not a man had known her. And down is she going to the spring, and is filling her jar and is coming up.
And running is the servant to meet her, and is saying, "Pray, let me sup a little water from your jar."
And saying is she, "Drink, my lord." And hastening is she and is letting down her jar on her hand and giving him to drink.
And finishing is she giving him to drink and is saying, "Moreover, for your camels will I bail till they should finish drinking."
And hastening is she and emptying her jar into the drinking basin, and running again to the well to bail. And bailing is she for all his camels.
And the man is in a tumult over her, and silent, to know if YHVH prospers his way or not?"
And coming is it, as the camels finish drinking, taking is the man a pendant of gold, its weight a bekah, and is placing it on her nose, and two bracelets on her hands of ten gold shekels' weight.
And he inquires of her and is saying, "Whose daughter are you? Tell me, pray. Forsooth, in the house of your father, is there place for us to lodge?"
And saying is she to him, "A daughter am I of Bethuel, the son of Milcah, whom she bore for Nahor."
And saying is she to him, "Moreover, crushed straw and provender there is much with us, and, moreover, a place to lodge."
And bowing is the man his head and worshiping YHVH.
And saying is he, "Blessed be YHVH, God of my lord Abraham, Who does not forsake His kindness and His truth with my lord Abraham. I am on the right way. Guided me has YHVH to the house of my lord's brothers."
And running is the maiden and telling her mother's household as to these matters.
And Rebecca has a brother, and his name is Laban. And running is Laban to the man outside at the spring.
And coming is it, as he sees the pendant, and the bracelets on his sister's hands, and as he hears the words of Rebecca, his sister, saying, "Thus spoke the man to me," that coming is he to the man. And behold! Standing is he with the camels at the spring.
And saying is he to him, "Come, blessed of YHVH! Why are you standing outside when I have prepared a surface in the house and a place for the camels?"
And coming is the man into the house. Yet, unloosening is he the camels' girths and giving crushed straw and provender to the camels, and water to wash his feet and the feet of the mortals who are with him.
And placing is he bread before him to eat. Yet saying is he, "Not eat will I till I should speak my word." And saying is he, "Speak."
And saying is he, "A servant of Abraham am I.
And YHVH has blessed my lord exceedingly, and he is growing great, and He is giving to him a flock and a herd and silver and gold and servants and maids and camels and asses.
And Sarah, the wife of my lord, bore one son for my lord after she was old. And give will he to him all that he has.
 "And adjuring me is my lord saying, `You shall not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanite, in whose land I dwell,
for you should go to the household of my father, and to my family, and take a wife for my son thence.'
And saying am I to my lord, `Perhaps the woman will not go after me.'
And saying is he to me, `YHVH God, before Whom I walk, He will send His messenger with you and prosper your way. And take shall you a wife for my son from my family, and from the household of my father.
Then you shall be innocent from my oath of imprecation. For come shall you to my family, and should they not give to you, then you shall be innocent from my oath of imprecation.'
And coming am I today to the spring. "And saying am I, `YHVH, God of my lord Abraham, pray, shouldst You, forsooth, be prospering my way on which I am now going,
behold! I am stationed at the spring of water where the daughters of the mortals of the city will fare forth to bail water. And comes it that the damsel is faring forth to bail, and I say to her, "Pray give me a little water to drink from your jar,"
and she says to me, "You drink, and, moreover, for your camels will I bail," she is the woman whom YHVH finds correct for Isaac, the son of my lord, and by this will I know that You do a kindness to my lord Abraham.'
 "Ere I am finishing speaking in my heart, behold! Rebecca is faring forth, and her jar is on her shoulder, and down is she going to the spring and is bailing. "And saying am I to her, `Give me a little water to drink, pray, from your jar.'
And hastening is she and letting down her jar on her hand and is saying, `Drink. And, moreover, your camels will I give a drink.' And drinking am I, and, moreover, she gives the camels a drink.
And asking her am I and saying, `Whose daughter are you?' And saying is she, `A daughter of Bethuel, son of Nahor, whom Milcah bore for him.' And placing am I the pendant on her nose and the bracelets on her hands.
And bowing my head am I and worshiping YHVH, and blessing YHVH, God of my lord Abraham, Who guides me in the way of truth, to take the daughter of my lord's brother for his son.
 "And now, if you, forsooth, deal in kindness and truth with my lord, tell me. And if not, tell me, and I will face to the right or to the left."
And answering are Laban and Bethuel and saying, "From YHVH fares forth this matter. We cannot speak to you evil or good.
Behold! Rebecca is before you. Take her and go, and she shall become the wife of your lord's son, as YHVH speaks."
And coming is it, as Abraham's servant hears their words, that he is prostrating to the earth to YHVH.
And forth is the servant bringing articles of silver and articles of gold and clothes, and is giving them to Rebecca. And token presents he gives to her brother and her mother.
And eating are they and drinking, he and the mortals who are with him, and lodging. And rising are they in the morning, and saying is he, "Send me, and I will go to my lord."
And saying are her brothers and her mother, "The maiden shall dwell with us two days or ten. And afterward she shall go."
And saying is he to them, "You must not delay me when YHVH prospers my way. Send me, and I will go to my lord."
And saying are they, "We will call the maiden and ask at her mouth."
And calling are they Rebecca and saying to her, "Will you go with this man?" And saying is she, "I will go."
And sending are they Rebecca, their sister, and her wet-nurse, and Abraham's servant and his mortals.
And blessing are they Rebecca, their sister, and saying to her, "Our sister are you. May you become thousands of myriads, and may your seed tenant the gateway of those hating them."
And rising is Rebecca and her maidens, and they are riding on camels, and are going after the man. And taking is the servant Rebecca and is going.
Now Isaac comes into the wilderness, to the well Lehirai. And dwelling is he in the land of the south-rim.
And forth is Isaac faring to worship in the field before the evening. And lifting is he his eyes and seeing. And behold! Camels are coming.
And lifting is Rebecca her eyes and is seeing Isaac and is alighting off the camel.
And saying is she to the servant, "What man is this going in the field to meet us?" And saying is the servant, "He is my lord." And taking is she a veil and covering herself.
And relating is the servant to Isaac all the things which he had done.
And bringing her is Isaac to the tent of Sarah, his mother. And taking is he Rebecca, and becoming is she his wife, and he is loving her. And comforted is Isaac after the loss of his mother, Sarah.
And continuing is Abraham, and taking is he a wife, and her name is Keturah.
And bearing is she for him Zimran and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuch.
And Jokshan generates Sheba, and Thumun and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan come to be Raguel and Nabdeel and Ashurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.
And the sons of Midian are Ephah and Apher and Enoch and Abida and Eldaah. All these are the sons of Keturah.
And giving is Abraham all which is his to his son Isaac.
And to the sons of the concubines which are Abraham's, Abraham gives gifts. And sending them is he away from Isaac, his son, while he is still living, eastward to the land of the East.
And these are the days of the years of the life of Abraham, which he lives a hundred and seventy five years.
And expiring is Abraham, and dying in a good grey-haired age, old and satisfied with days. And gathered is he to his people.
And entombing him are his sons, Isaac and Ishmael, in the double cave in the field of Ephron, the son of Zohar, the Hittite, which is adjoining Mamre,
the field and the cave which Abraham bought from the sons of Heth. There is made a tomb for Abraham, and Sarah, his wife.
And coming is it, after the death of Abraham, that God is blessing Isaac, his son. And dwelling is Isaac by the well Lehi-rai.
And these are the genealogical annals of Ishmael, son of Abraham, whom Hagar, the Egyptian, Sarah's maid, bore for Abraham:
And these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, for their genealogical annals: The firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth; and Kedar and Adbeel and Mibsam
and Mishma and Dumah and Massa
and Chador and Tema and Jetur and Naphish and Kedemah.
These, they are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, in their environs and in their domiciles twelve princes for their clans.
And these are the years of the life of Ishmael: a hundred and thirty seven years. And expiring is he, and died, and is gathered to his people.
And tabernacling are they from Havilah unto Shur, which is adjoining Egypt, as you come to Assyria. It falls to him to be adjoining all his brothers.
And these are the genealogical annals of Isaac, son of Abraham: Abraham begets Isaac.
And coming is Isaac to be forty years of age at his taking Rebecca, the daughter of Bethuel, the Syrian of Padan, Syria, the sister of Laban the Syrian, for his wife.
And Isaac is entreating YHVH for the invigorating of Rebecca, his wife, for barren is she. And YHVH is being entreated by him, and pregnant is Rebecca, his wife.
And bruising themselves are the sons within her. And saying is she, "Should it be so? Why have I this?" And going is she to inquire of YHVH.
And saying is YHVH to her, "Two nations are in your belly, and two folkstems shall be parted from your bowels. And one folkstem shall be more resolute than the other folkstem. And the greater shall serve the inferior."
And fulfilled are the days of her bearing. And behold! Twins are in her belly.
And forth is faring the first, ruddy, all of him as a fur robe of hair. And calling are they his name Esau.
And afterward his brother fares forth. And his hand is holding the heel of Esau. And calling are they his name Jacob. And Isaac is sixty years of age when Rebecca bears them.
And growing up are the lads. And becoming is Esau a man, a knowing hunter, a man of the field. Yet Jacob is a flawless man, dwelling in tents.
And loving is Isaac Esau for his game is in his mouth. Yet Rebecca is loving Jacob.
And stewing is Jacob a stew. And coming is Esau from the field and is faint.
And saying is Esau to Jacob, "Glut me, pray, with the red this red stew, for faint am I." Therefore called is his name Edom also.
And saying is Jacob to Esau, "Sell, as of today, your birthright to me."
And saying is Esau, "Behold! I am going to die, and what is this birthright to me?"
And saying is Jacob to him, "Swear to me as of today." And swearing is he to him. And selling is Esau his birthright to Jacob.
And Jacob gives Esau bread and stewed lentils. And eating is he and drinking, and rising and going. And despising is Esau the birthright.
And coming is a famine in the land, aside from the first famine which came in the days of Abraham. And going is Isaac to Abimelech, king of the Philistines, to Gerar.
And appearing to him is YHVH and saying, "You must not go down to Egypt. Tabernacle in the land of which I apprize you.
Sojourn in this land, and I come to be with you and will bless you. For to you and to your seed will I give all these lands, and carry out will I the oath which I swore to Abraham, your father.
And increase will I your seed as the stars of the heavens, and give will I to your seed all these lands. And blessed, in your seed, are all the nations of the earth,
inasmuch as hearken did Abraham, your father, to My voice and kept My charge, My instructions. My statutes, and My laws."
And dwelling is Isaac in Gerar.
And asking are the mortals of the place as to Rebecca, his wife. And saying is he, "My sister is she." For he fears to say, "My wife is she," lest the mortals of the place kill him on account of Rebecca, for a good appearance has she.
And coming is it that his days there are long. And gazing is Abimelech, king of Gerar of the Philistines, through a window, and is seeing, and behold! Isaac is having fun with Rebecca, his wife.
And calling is Abimelech Isaac and saying to him, "Yea, behold! Your wife is she! And how say you, `My sister is she'?" And saying to him is Isaac, that, "I say it lest I die on her account."
And saying is Abimelech to him, "What is this you do to us? As if it were a little thing if one of my people lie with your wife and you bring the guilt upon us!"
And instructing is Abimelech all his people saying, "Everyone touching this man or his wife shall surely be put to death."
And sowing is Isaac in that land and is finding in that year a hundredfold of barley. And blessing him is YHVH.
And great is growing the man. And going is he to go on and grow greater, till he is great exceedingly.
And it is coming at his acquiring flocks and acquiring herds and many to serve, that jealous are the Philistines of him.
And all the wells which his father's servants had delved in the days of Abraham, his father, the Philistines stop them up, and are filling them with soil.
And saying is Abimelech to Isaac, "Go from our people, for you are very much stauncher than we."
And going is Isaac thence, and is camping in the watercourse of Gerar, and is dwelling there.
And returning is Isaac and delving the wells of water which were delved by servants of Abraham, his father, and the Philistines had stopped them up after the death of Abraham, his father. And calling is he them by names according to the names which Abraham, his father, called them.
And delving are the servants of Isaac in the watercourse of Gerar, and finding are they there a well of living water.
And contending are the graziers of Gerar with Isaac's graziers saying, "Ours is the water." And calling is he the name of the well Esek, for extortionate show they themselves with him.
And shifting is Isaac thence, and delving are they another well. Yet contending are they, moreover, over it. And calling is he its name Sitnah.
And shifting is he thence, and delving are they another well. And they do not contend over it. And calling is he its name Rehoboth. And saying is he, "For now YHVH widens for us, and fruitful are we in the land."
And up is he going thence to Beer-sheba.
And appearing to him is YHVH in that night, and saying, "I am God of Abraham your father. You must not fear, for with you am I. And bless you will I, and increase will I your seed for the sake of Abraham your father, My servant."
And building is he an altar there. And calling is he on the name of YHVH. And stretching out is he his tent there. And digging are the servants of Isaac a well.
And Abimelech goes to him from Gerar, with Ahuzzath, his associate, and Phicol, the chief of his host.
And saying to them is Isaac, "For what reason do you come to me, when you hate me and you are sending me away from you?"
And saying are they, "We see, yea, see that YHVH has come to be with you, and we are saying, `Let there come, pray, an oath of imprecation between us, between us and you, and contract will we a covenant with you.
Should you do to us evil, when we do not touch you, and when we do to you but good, and send you away in peace?' You are now the blessed of YHVH."
And making is he for them a feast, and eating are they and drinking.
And rising early are they in the morning, and swearing are they, a man to his brother. And sending them away is Isaac. And they are going from him in peace.
And coming is it on that day, coming also are servants of Isaac. And telling are they him concerning the case of the well which they delve, and are saying to him, "We found water."
And calling is he it Sheba. Therefore the name of the city is Beer-sheba till this day.
And coming is Esau to be forty years old when he is taking as wife Judith, the daughter of Beeri, the Hittite, and Bashemath, the daughter of Elon, the Hivite.
And coming are they to be a bitterness of spirit to Isaac and Rebecca.
And coming it is that old is Isaac, dim-sighted are his eyes. And calling is he Esau, his elder son, and is saying to him, "My son!" And saying is he to him, "Behold me!"
And saying is he, "Behold, pray! Old am I, and not know do I the day of my death.
And now, pray, lift up your gear, your hanger and your bow, and fare forth to the field and hunt game for me,
and make for me tasties, such as I love, and bring them to me, and eat will I, in order that my soul may bless you ere I die."
And Rebecca is hearing Isaac speaking to Esau, his son. And going is Esau to the field to hunt game for his father.
And Rebecca spoke to Jacob, her son, the inferior in station, saying, "Behold! I heard your father speaking to Esau, your brother, saying,
 `Bring me game and make for me tasties, and eat will I and bless you will I before YHVH before my death.'
And now, my son, hearken to my voice in that which I am instructing you.
Go, pray, to the flock, and take for me thence two kids of the goats, tender and good, and I will make of them tasties for your father, such as he loves,
And you shall bring them to your father, and eat will he, in order that your father may bless you before his death."
And saying is Jacob to Rebecca, his mother, "Behold! Esau, my brother, is a hairy man, and I am a slick man.
Perhaps my father will feel me, and become will I in his eyes as one who leads him astray, and I bring on me a slight and not a blessing."
And saying to him is his mother, "On me be your slight, my son. Yea, hearken to my voice and go. Take them for me."
And going is he and taking and bringing them to his mother. And making is his mother tasties, such as his father loves.
And taking is Rebecca the coveted garments of Esau, her elder son, which are with her in the house, and is putting them on Jacob, her smaller son.
And the skins of the kids of the goats she puts on his hands and on the slick of his neck.
And giving is she the tasties and the bread which she made into the hand of Jacob, her son.
And coming is he to his father and saying, "My father!" And saying is he, "Behold me! Who are you, my son?"
And saying is Jacob to his father, "I am Esau, your firstborn. I did as you spoke to me. Rise, pray! Sit and eat of my game, in order that your soul may be blessing me."
And saying is Isaac to his son, "What is this? You hasted to find it, my son!" And saying is he, "For YHVH, your God, caused it to happen before me."
And saying is Isaac to Jacob, "Come close, pray, and I will feel you, my son. Is this you, my son Esau, or not?"
And close is Jacob coming to Isaac, his father. And feeling him is he and saying, "The voice is the voice of Jacob, yet the hands are the hands of Esau."
Yet he did not identify him, for his hands are become as the hands of Esau, his brother, hairy. And blessing him is he.
And saying is he, "This is you, my son Esau?" And saying is he, "I am."
And saying is he, "Bring it close to me, and I will eat of my son's game, that my soul may be blessing you." And close is he bringing it to him, and he is eating. And he is bringing him wine, and he is drinking.
And saying to him is Isaac, his father, "Come close, pray, and kiss me, my son."
And close is he coming and kissing him. And smelling is he the smell of his garments and is blessing him, saying, "See! The smell of my son is as the smell of the full field blessed by YHVH.
And give you will God the night mist of the heavens. And the oil of the earth, and much grain and grape juice.
Serve you shall peoples, and down shall bow to you the folkstems. Master be you over your brothers, and down to you shall bow the sons of your mother, One cursing you is accursed. And one blessing you is blessed!"
And coming is it, as Isaac finishes blessing Jacob, his son, and coming, yea barely forth, is Jacob from the face of Isaac, his father, when Esau, his brother, comes from his hunting.
And making tasties is he, moreover, and is bringing them to his father. And saying is he to his father, "Rise will my father and eat of his son's game, in order that bless me will your soul."
And saying to him is Isaac, his father, "Who are you?" And saying is he, "I am your son, your firstborn, Esau."
And trembling is Isaac, a trembling, great unto excess. And saying is he, "Who, indeed, was he, the hunter of game who brought it to me, and I ate of all ere you came, and bless him did I? And, moreover, blessed shall he be!"
And coming is it, as Esau hears the words of his father Isaac, that crying is he a cry great and bitter unto excess. And saying is he to his father, "Bless me, me moreover, my father!"
And saying is he to him, "Your brother came with deceit, and he has taken your blessing."
And saying is he, "Because he calls his name Jacob, is it that he is circumventing me already this twice? My birthright took he. And behold! Now he takes my blessing!" And saying is Esau to his father, "Have you not besides a blessing for me?"
And answering is Isaac and saying to Esau, "Behold! As master have I placed him over you, and all of his brothers have I given to him for servants, and with grain and grape juice I support him. And for you, indeed, what shall I do, my son?"
And saying is Esau to his father, "Your one blessing is it, my father? Bless me, me moreover, my father!" Yet silent is Isaac, and lifting is Esau his voice and is lamenting.
And answering is Isaac, his father, and saying to him, "Behold! Away from the oil of the earth is coming to be your dwelling, and from the night mist of the heavens above.
And by your sword shall you live, and your brother shall you serve. Yet it comes, as you are caused to sway, you also break off his yoke off your neck."
And a grudge is Esau holding against Jacob on account of the blessing with which his father blesses him. And saying is Esau in his heart, "Approaching are the days of mourning for my father, when I will kill Jacob, my brother."
And told to Rebecca are the words of Esau, her elder son. And sending is she, and calling for Jacob, her smaller son, and saying is she to him, "Behold! Esau, your brother, is consoling himself as to you, intending to kill you.
And now, my son, hearken to my voice, and rise, run away by yourself to Syria, to Laban, my brother, to Charan.
And dwell with him several days, till back is turning your brother's fury,
till back turns your brother's anger from you, and forgotten has he what you did to him, and I send and take you thence. Why shall I be bereaved, moreover, of you two in one day?"
And saying is Rebecca to Isaac, "Irritated am I in my life because of the presence of the daughters of the sons of Heth. Should Jacob take a wife such as these from the daughters of Heth, from the daughters of the land, what has life for me?"
And calling is Isaac to Jacob, and is blessing him and instructing him. And saying is he to him, "Not take shall you a wife from the daughters of Canaan.
Rise, go to Padan, Syria, the home of Bethuel, your mother's father and take for yourself thence a wife, from the daughters of Laban, the brother of your mother.
And El-Who-Suffices will bless you and make you fruitful and increase you, and you shall become an assembly of peoples.
And give to you will he the blessing of Abraham, my father, to you and to your seed with you, for you to tenant the land of your sojournings, given by God to Abraham."
And Isaac is sending Jacob away. And going is he to Padan, Syria, to Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian, brother of Rebecca, the mother of Jacob and Esau.
And seeing is Esau that Isaac blesses Jacob and sends him to Padan, Syria, to take thence a wife for himself, and, in his blessing him, he is also instructing him, saying, "You shall not take a wife from the daughters of Canaan,"
and that Jacob is hearkening to his father and to his mother, and is going to Padan, Syria.
And seeing is Esau that evil are the daughters of Canaan in the eyes of Isaac, his father.
And going is Esau to Ishmael, and taking Mahalath, a daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's son, sister of Nebaioth, to his wives, for his wife.
And forth is Jacob faring from Beer-sheba, and going toward Charan.
And coming is he upon a place and is lodging there, for the sun has set. And taking is he one of the stones of the place, and is placing it for his pillow, and lying down is he in that place.
And dreaming is he, and behold! A stairway set up earthward, with its head touching the heavens. And behold! Messengers of God are ascending and descending on it.
And behold! YHVH is stationed on it. And saying is He, "I am YHVH, God of Abraham, your forefather, and God of Isaac. Do not fear. The land on which you are lying, to you will I give it, and to your seed.
And become shall your seed as the soil of the land. And breach forth will you seaward and eastward and northward and toward the south-rim. And blessed, in you, are all the families of the ground, and in your seed.
And behold! I am with you, and keep you in every way which you shall go, and will restore you to this ground, for not forsake you will I, till I should do all which I have spoken to you."
And waking is Jacob from his sleep and saying, "Surely, forsooth, YHVH is in this place, and I knew it not."
And fearing is he saying, "What a fearful place is this! But is not this rather the house of God, and this the gateway of the heavens?"
And early is Jacob rising in the morning, and taking is he the stone which he had placed there for his pillow, and is placing it for a monument, and pouring oil on its top.
And calling is Jacob the name of that place Beth-El. Howbeit, Luz was the name of the city at first.
And vowing is Jacob a vow, saying, "Should it be coming that YHVH God stands by me, and keeps me in this way which I am going, and gives to me bread to eat and a garment to put on,
and I return in peace to my father's household, then YHVH becomes my God,
and this stone, which I place for a monument, shall become the house of God for me. And of all that You are giving to me, tithe, yea, tithe it will I for You."
And lifting is Jacob his feet and is going toward the land of the sons of the east, to Laban, the son of Bethuel, the Syrian, brother of Rebecca, the mother of Jacob and Esau.
And seeing is he, and, behold! A well in the field. And, behold! There are three droves of small cattle reclining at it, for from that well are they giving the droves a drink. And the stone on the mouth of the well is great.
And gathered there are all the droves. And they roll the stone off the mouth of the well and give the small cattle a drink. Then they restore the stone on the mouth of the well to its place.
And saying to them is Jacob, "My brethren, whence are you?" And saying are they, "From Charan are we."
And saying is he to them, "Do you know Laban, the son of Nahor?" And saying are they, "We know him."
And saying is he to them, "Fares he well?" And saying are they, "Well fares he. And behold! Rachel, his daughter, is coming with the flock."
And saying is Jacob to them, "Behold! Still is the day great. It is not seasonable to gather the cattle. Give a drink to the flock, and go, graze them."
And saying are they, "We cannot till gathering are all the herds, and they roll the stone off the mouth of the well and give a drink to the flocks."
At his still speaking with them, Rachel, the daughter of Laban, comes with the flock which is her father's, for the grazier is she of her father's flock.
And coming is it, as Jacob sees Rachel, the daughter of Laban, his mother's brother, and the flock of Laban, his mother's brother, then close is coming Jacob, and he is rolling the stone off the mouth of the well, and is giving a drink to the flock of Laban, his mother's brother.
And Jacob is kissing Rachel, and is lifting up his voice and lamenting.
And telling is Jacob to Rachel that he is her father's brother, and that the son of Rebecca is he. And running is she and telling her father these things.
And coming is it, as Laban hears the report of Jacob, his sister's son, running is he also to meet him. And embracing him is he and kissing him, and bringing him to his house. And relating is he to Laban all these things.
And saying to him is Laban, "Yea, my bone and my flesh are you." And dwelling with him is he the days of a month.
And saying is Laban to Jacob, "Seeing that my brother are you, then serve you me gratuitously? Tell me what is your hire."
Now Laban had two daughters. The name of the elder is Leah and the name of the younger is Rachel.
And the eyes of Leah are tender, yet Rachel is lovely in shapeliness, and lovely in appearance.
And loving is Jacob Rachel. And saying is he, "Serve you will I seven years for Rachel, your younger daughter."
And saying to him is Laban, "Better I give her to you than that I give her to another man. Dwell, withal."
And serving is Jacob for Rachel seven years. And becoming are they in his eyes as several days, in his love for her.
And saying is Jacob to Laban, "Grant me my wife, for fulfilled are my days, and I will come to her."
And gathering is Laban all the mortals of the place and is making a feast.
And coming is it in the evening that Laban is taking Leah, his daughter, and is bringing her to Jacob, and Jacob is coming to her.
And giving is Laban Zilpah, his maid, to Leah, his daughter, for a maid.
And coming is it in the morning, and behold! She is Leah. And saying is Jacob to Laban, "What is this you do to me? Did I not for Rachel serve with you? And why do you deceive me?"
And saying is Laban, "Not so is it being done in our place, to give the inferior in station before the firstborn.
Fulfill the seven of this one, and give will I to you this one, moreover, for the service which you shall serve, withal, further another seven years."
And doing so is Jacob. And fulfilling is he this one's seven. And giving to him is Laban Rachel, his daughter, for his wife.
And giving is Laban Bilhah, his maid, to Rachel, his daughter, for her maid.
And coming is he, moreover, to Rachel, and, moreover, loving is he Rachel more than Leah. And serving is he with him further another seven years.
And seeing is YHVH that Leah is hated, and opening is He her womb. Yet Rachel is barren.
And pregnant is Leah and is bearing a son for Jacob. And calling is she his name Reuben for she says, "For see does YHVH my humiliation and gives me a son, for now my husband will love me."
And pregnant is Leah again, and is bearing a second son for Jacob. And saying is she, "For hearing is YHVH that hated am I, and giving to me is He this one, moreover." And calling is she his name Simeon.
And pregnant is she again and is bearing a son. And saying is she, "Now once more will my husband be obligated to me, for I bear for him three sons." Therefore calling is she his name Levi.
And pregnant is she again, and is bearing a son. And saying is she, "Now once more will I acclaim YHVH." Therefore calling is she his name Judah. And staying is she from bearing.
And seeing is Rachel that she does not bear for Jacob. And jealous is Rachel of her sister. And saying is she to Jacob, "Grant me sons! And, should there be none, I will die."
And hot is the anger of Jacob against Rachel. And saying is he to her, "In God's stead am I, Who withholds from you the fruit of the belly?"
And saying is Rachel to Jacob, "Behold my maidservant Bilhah. Come to her and bear shall she on my knees, and I, moreover, will be built by her."
And giving him is she Bilhah, her maid, for a wife. And coming is Jacob to her.
And pregnant is Rachel's maid, Bilhah, and is bearing for Jacob a son.
And saying is Rachel, "Adjudicated has God for me, and, moreover, He hears my voice, and is giving to me a son." Therefore she calls his name Dan.
And pregnant is she again, and bearing is Bilhah, Rachel's maid, a second son for Jacob.
And saying is Rachel, "With twistings of God am I twisted with my sister, and moreover, I prevail." And calling is she his name Naphtali.
And seeing is Leah that she stays from bearing. And taking is she Zilpah, her maid, and is giving her to Jacob for a wife. And coming is Jacob to her,
and Zilpah, Leah's maid, is pregnant and bearing for Jacob a son.
And saying is Leah, "Coming is a raid!" And calling is she his name Gad.
And pregnant is Zilpah, Leah's maid, and is bearing a second son for Jacob.
And saying is Leah "Happiness is mine, for the daughters call me happy." And calling is she his name Ashur.
And going is Reuben in the days of wheat harvest and finding mandrakes in the field, and is bringing them to his mother, Leah. And saying is Rachel to Leah, her sister, "Give to me, pray, of your son's mandrakes."
And saying is Leah to her, "No! Is it little of you to take my husband, then to take, moreover, my son's mandrakes?" And saying is Rachel, "Not so! He shall lie with you this night, for your son's mandrakes."
And coming is Jacob from the field in the evening, and forth is faring Leah to meet him. And saying is she, "To me are you coming tonight, for I hired, yea, hired you with my son's mandrakes." And lying is he with her in that night.
And hearkening is God to Leah, and pregnant is she and is bearing for Jacob a fifth son.
And saying is Leah, "Giving is God my hire, for I give my maid to my husband." And calling is she his name Issachar.
And pregnant again is Leah, and is bearing a sixth son for Jacob.
And saying is Leah, "Dowering me is God with a good dowry this time. My husband will prefer me, for I bear for him six sons." And calling is she his name Zebulon.
And afterwards she bears a daughter. And calling is she her name Dinah.
And remembering is God Rachel and hearkening to her is God and opening her womb.
And pregnant is she and bearing for Jacob a son. And saying is Rachel, "God gathers up my reproach."
And calling is she his name Joseph saying, "Adding is YHVH to me another son."
And coming is it, as Rachel bears Joseph, then saying is Jacob to Laban, "Send me, and I will go to my place and to my land
Give me my wives and my children, for whom I have served you, and go will I, for you know my service with which I have served you."
And saying to him is Laban, "If, pray, I find grace in your eyes! I augur that YHVH's blessing me is due to your coming."
And saying is he, "Specify your hire to me, and I will give it."
And saying is Jacob to him, "You know how I have served you, and what becomes of your cattle with me.
For little was that which came to be yours before, and breaching is it into much. And blessing you is YHVH, at my footsteps. Yet now, when shall I do something, moreover I, for my own household?"
And saying to him is Laban, "What shall I give to you?" And saying is Jacob, "Naught shall you give me. If you will do for me this thing, I will return: Graze will I your flock and keep it,
pass will I among all your flock today to take away thence every speckled and flecked flockling, also every brown flockling among the sheep, and all the flecked and speckled among the goats, and it becomes my hire.
And responding is my righteousness for me, on the morrow day, for on account of my hire shall it come before you. Every one in which there is no speck and fleck among the goats, and brown among the sheep, stolen is it if with me."
And saying to him is Laban, "Behold! O that it shall come according to your word!"
And taking away is he in that day the striped and the flecked bucks, and all the speckled and the flecked she-goats, and everyone which has white in it, and all the brown among the sheep, and giving them is he into the hands of his sons.
And placing is he a way of three days between them and Jacob's. And Jacob is grazing the flock of Laban, what is left.
And taking is Jacob for himself sticks of smooth white poplar and of hazel and of the plane tree, and is peeling in them white peelings, baring the white which is on the sticks.
And putting is he the sticks which he peeled in the troughs, in the drinking water, to which the flocks are coming to drink opposite the flocks. And warm with desire are they at the sticks when they come to drink.
And warm with desire are the flocks at the sticks, and are bearing small cattle, striped, speckled, and flecked.
And the sheep Jacob parts, and he puts the faces of the flocks towards the striped and all the brown among Laban's flock. And he is setting his own droves alone, and does not set them with Laban's flock.
And it comes, in every season of warming with desire of the sinewy of the flock, then Jacob places the sticks before the eyes of the flock, in the troughs, for them to warm with desire among the sticks.
Yet with the drooping ones of the flock he is not placing them. And the drooping became Laban's and the sinewy Jacob's.
And breaching is the man exceeding exceedingly, and coming is he to have many small cattle and herds and maids and servants and camels and asses.
And hearing is Jacob the words of Laban's sons, saying, "Taking is Jacob all which was our father's. And from that which is our father's he makes all this glory."
And seeing is Jacob the face of Laban, and behold! It is not with him as heretofore.
And saying is YHVH to Jacob, "Return to the land of your forefathers and to your kindred, and come will I to be with you."
And sending is Jacob and calling Rachel and Leah to the field, to his flock.
And saying is he to them, "Seeing am I the face of your father, that it is not toward me as heretofore. And God of my father came to stand by me.
And you know that with all my vigor I served your father.
Yet your father trifles with me, and varied my hire at ten countings. Yet God did not allow him to do evil withal.
If thus he is saying: `The speckled shall be your hire,' then bear do all the flock speckled. And if thus he is saying: `The striped shall be your hire,' then bear do all the flock striped.
And rescuing is God the cattle of your father and is giving them to me.
And coming is it at the season that the flock is warm with desire, that I am lifting my eyes and seeing in a dream and, behold! The he-goats and the rams that go up on the small cattle are striped, speckled, and dappled.
And saying to me is a messenger of God in a dream. `Jacob!' And saying am I, `Behold me!'
And saying is He, `Lift your eyes, pray, and see that all the he-goats and the rams going up on the small cattle are striped, speckled, and dappled, for I see all that Laban is doing to you.
I am the El of Beth-El, where you anointed the monument and where you vowed a vow to Me. And now, rise, fare forth from this land, and return to the land of your kindred, and I will come to be with you.'"
And answering are Rachel and Leah, and saying are they to him, "Is there further for us a portion and allotment in the household of our father?
Are not we reckoned as foreigners by him? For he sold us, and devouring is he, even devouring our money.
For all the riches and the glory which God rescues from our father, ours is it and our sons'. And now, all that God says to you, do."
And rising is Jacob, and lifting his wives and his sons on camels,
and leading away all his cattle, and all his goods which he got, the cattle he acquired, which he got in Padan, Syria, to come to Isaac, his father, to the land of Canaan.
And Laban goes to shear his flock. And stealing is Rachel the household God which are her father's.
And stealing is Jacob the heart out of Laban, the Syrian, on failing to tell him that he is running away.
And away is he running, he and all which is his. And rising is he and crossing the stream, and is setting his face toward mount Gilead.
And it is being told Laban, the Syrian, on the third day, that Jacob ran away.
And taking is he all his brethren with him, and is pursuing after him a way of seven days, and hard is he following after him in mount Gilead.
And coming is God to Laban, the Syrian, in a dream in the night. And saying is He to him, "Beware, you, lest you be speaking with Jacob from good unto evil!"
And Laban is overtaking Jacob. And Jacob pitches his tent in the mount. And Laban pitches with his brethren in mount Gilead.
And saying is Laban to Jacob, "What have you done? And stealing are you my heart, and leading away my daughters as captives of the sword!
Why hide to run away and steal from me, and not tell me, that I could send you with rejoicing and with songs and with tambourine and with harp?
And you did not let me kiss my sons and my daughters. Now, silly are you to do so.
Forsooth! Disposed is my hand to do to you evil. Yet God of your father yesternight spoke to me, saying, `Beware, you, of speaking with Jacob from good unto evil!'
And now, go, yea, go, for you long longingly for the household of your father. Why have you stolen my God?"
And answering is Jacob and saying to Laban, "For I feared, for I said, lest you may be snatching your daughters from me, and all that is mine.
With whom you are finding your God, not live shall he. In front of our brethren, identify what is yours, withal, and take it to you." Yet not know did Jacob that Rachel, his wife, had stolen them.
And coming is Laban into Jacob's tent, and into Leah's tent and into the two maidservant's tent, and does not find them. And forth is he faring from Leah's tent and is coming into Rachel's tent.
Yet Rachel took the household God and placed them in the saddle basket of the camel, and she is sitting on them. And feeling is Laban all the tent, yet did not find them.
And saying is she to her father, "It must not be hot in the eyes of my lord that I cannot rise before you, for the way of women is on me." And searching is Laban in all the tent, yet he does not find the household God.
And hot is Jacob, and contending is he with Laban. And answering is Jacob and saying to Laban, "What is my transgression and what is my sin, that you dash after me, and that you feel all the furnishings of my tent?
And what have you found of all the furnishings of your house? Place it thus in front of my brethren and your brethren, and correct will they the matter between us two.
This twenty years am I with you. Your ewes and your she-goats were not bereaved, and the rams of your flock I did not eat.
That which was torn to pieces, I did not bring to you. I was made a sin offering for it! From my hand you sought it, be it stolen by day or stolen by night!
So became I: In the day the drought devoured me, and the ice in the night, and flit did my sleep from my eyes.
This, for me, was twenty years in your household. I served you fourteen years for your two daughters, and six years for your flock, and vary did you my hire at ten countings.
Unless God of my father, God of Abraham, and the Awe of Isaac had come to be with me, then now you would have sent me away empty-handed. The humiliation and the weariness of my palms God sees, and correcting you was He yesternight."
And answering is Laban and saying to Jacob, "The daughters are my daughters, and the sons my sons, and the flock my flock, and all that you are seeing, mine is it, and my daughters'. What shall I do for these today, or for their sons which they have borne?
Yet now, go. Contract will we a covenant, I and you, and it will become a witness between me and you." And saying is he to him, "Behold! No one is with us. Behold! God is Witness between me and you."
And taking is Jacob a stone and is raising it for a monument.
And saying is Jacob to his brethren, "Pick up stones." And they are picking up stones and making a mound. And eating are they and drinking there on the mound. And saying to him is Laban, "This mound is witness between me and you today."
And calling it is Laban Igr-shedutha. And Jacob calls it Galeed.
And saying is Laban to Jacob, "Behold! This mound and this monument which I raised, is witness between me and you today."
Therefore he calls its name Galeed and the Mizpah which says: "Watching is YHVH between me and you, when we are concealed, each man from his associate."
 "Should you humiliate my daughters, and should you take wives over my daughters, then not a man is with us. See! God is Witness between me and you."
And saying is Laban to Jacob, "Behold this mound! And behold the monument which I aim to be between me and you.
Witness is this mound, and witness is the monument, that I should not be passing this mound to you, and you should not be passing this mound and this monument to me, for evil!
God of Abraham and God of Nahor, God of the forefathers, shall judge between us." And swearing is Jacob by the Awe of his father Isaac.
And sacrificing is Jacob a sacrifice in the mountain. And calling is he his brethren to eat bread. And eating are they bread and lodging in the mountain.
And early is Laban rising in the morning, and kissing is he his sons and his daughters and blessing them. And going is Laban, and returning to his place.
And Jacob goes his way. And seeing in a vision, he sees the camp of God encamped. And coming upon him are messengers of God.
And saying is Jacob as he sees them, "The camp of God is this!" And calling is he the name of that place Mahanaim.
And sending is Jacob messengers before him to Esau, his brother, to the land of Seir, the field of Edom.
And instructing them is he, saying, "Thus shall you say to my lord, to Esau, `Thus says your servant Jacob: With Laban I sojourn and it delayed me till now.
And mine are becoming bulls and asses and a flock, and servants and maids. And sending am I to tell my lord Esau that your servant finds grace in your eyes.'"
And returning are the messengers to Jacob, saying, "We came to your brother, Esau, and, moreover, going is he to meet you, and four hundred men with him."
And fearing is Jacob exceedingly, and it is distressing to him. And dividing is he the people who are with him, and the flock and the herd and the camels, into two camps.
And saying is Jacob, "Should Esau be coming to one camp and smite it, yet the remaining camp will come to be delivered."
And saying is Jacob, "God of my forefather Abraham and God of my father Isaac, YHVH Who said to me, `Return to your land and to your kindred and I will do good to you.'
Smaller am I than all the kindnesses and than all the truth which You do to Your servant, for with my stick I crossed this Jordan, and now I have become two camps.
Rescue me, pray, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau, for I fear him, lest he comes and smites me, and the mother with the sons.
And you said, `Good, yea, good will I do to you, and I make your seed as the sand of the sea, which is not being numbered for multitude.'"
And lodging there is he in that night. And taking is he, of that which is coming to his hand, a present offering, and sends it to Esau, his brother:
Two hundred she goats, and twenty bucks, two hundred ewes, and twenty rams,
thirty suckler camels and their foals, forty young cows and ten bulls, twenty she-asses, and ten colts.
And giving them is he into the hand of his servants, drove by drove alone. And saying is he to his servants, "Pass before me, and place an interval between drove and drove."
And instructing is he the first, saying, "In case Esau, my brother, is encountering you, and he asks you, saying, `Whose are you? And whither are you going? And whose are these before you?'
Then you say, `To your servant, to Jacob. A present offering is it, sent to my lord, to Esau. And, behold! He, moreover, is behind us.'"
And instructing is he the first; moreover, the second; and, moreover, the third; and, moreover, all those who are going after the droves, saying, "According to this word shall you speak to Esau, when you find him.
And say, moreover, `Behold! Your servant Jacob comes after us.' For," said he, "a propitiatory shelter am I making before his face with the present offering which is going before me, and afterward will I see his face. Perhaps he will lift up my face."
And passing is the present offering on before his face. Yet he lodges in that night in the camp.
And rising is he in that night and taking his two wives and his two maids and his eleven children, and is crossing the crossing of the Jabbok.
And taking them is he and is passing them over the watercourse. And passing over is he all which is his.
And left is Jacob alone. And wrestling is a Man with him till the ascending of the dawn.
And seeing is he that he does not prevail against Him. Yet touching is He the palm of his thighbone. And strained is the palm of Jacob's thighbone in his wrestling with Him.
And saying is He to him, "Send Me away, for the dawn ascends." And saying is he, "Not letting You go am I save You bless me."
And saying is He to him, "What is your name?" And saying is he, "Jacob."
And saying is He to him, "Not Jacob shall your name be called longer, but rather Israel is your name. For upright are you with God and with mortals, and are prevailing."
And asking is Jacob and saying, "Tell me, pray, your name." And saying is He, "Why is this that you are asking for My name?" And blessing him is He there.
And calling is Jacob the name of the place Peniel, "for I see God face to face, and rescued is my soul."
And irradiating him is the sun as he passes Peniel. Yet he is limping on his thigh.
Therefore not eating are the sons of Israel the sinew which was benumbed, which is on the palm of the thighbone, till this day, for He touched the palm of Jacob's thighbone at the sinew benumbed.
And lifting is Jacob his eyes and seeing, and behold! Esau, his brother, is coming, and with him four hundred men. And dividing is Jacob the children to Leah and to Rachel and to the two maids.
And placing is he the maids and their children first, and Leah and her children after them, and Rachel and Joseph last.
And he passes before them and is prostrating himself to the earth seven times till he is close to his brother.
And running is Esau to meet him. And embracing him is he, and falling on his neck and kissing him, and they are weeping.
And lifting is he his eyes and seeing the women and the children. And saying is he, "What are these to you?" And saying is he, "The children which God graciously gives your servant."
And close are coming the maids, they and their children, and they are prostrating themselves.
And, moreover, close are coming Leah and her children, and prostrating themselves. And, afterward, close come Joseph and Rachel, and they are prostrating themselves.
And saying is he, "What is all this camp to you which I encountered?" And saying is he, "To find grace for your servant in the eyes of my lord."
And saying is Esau, "Forsooth, mine is much, my brother. Be yours what is yours."
And saying is Jacob, "You must not, pray. Pray, if I find grace in your eyes, then take my present offering from my hand, for therefore I see your face, as if seeing the face of God, and accepting me are you.
Take, pray, my blessing which I bring to you, for gracious to me is God in that it, forsooth, is all mine." And urging it on him is he, and he is taking it.
And saying is he, "Journey will we and go, and I will go in front of you."
And saying is he to him, "My lord knows that the children are tender, and the flock and the herd with unweaned are dependent on me, and, if I trot them one day, then die will all the small cattle.
Pray, pass will my lord before his servant, and I will conduct them carefully, according to the pace of the work which is before me, and to the pace of the children, till I come to my lord to Seir."
And saying is Esau, "Pray, I will put with you some of the people who are with me." And saying is he, "Why this? Enough is it that I am finding grace in the eyes of my lord."
And returning is Esau on that day on his way to Seir.
And Jacob journeys to Succoth. And building is he for himself a house there. And for his cattle he makes booths. Therefore he calls the name of the place Succoth.
And coming is Jacob in peace to the city of Shechem, which is in the land of Canaan, at his coming from Padan, Syria. And camping is he before the city.
And acquiring is he a portion of the field where his tent is stretched out, from the hand of the sons of Hamor, the father of Shechem, for a hundred coins, sterling.
And setting up is he there an altar, and calling on El-God-Ishral.
And forth is faring Dinah, the daughter of Leah, whom she bore for Jacob, to see the daughters of the land.
And seeing her is Shechem, son of Hamor, the Hivite, the prince of the land. And taking her is he and lying with her and humiliating her.
And clinging is his soul to Dinah, the daughter of Jacob, and loving the maiden is he, and speaking to the heart of the maiden.
And speaking is Shechem to Hamor, his father, saying, "Take for me this girl for a wife."
And Jacob hears that the son of Hamor had defiled Dinah, his daughter. Yet his sons came to be with his cattle in the field, and silent is Jacob till their coming.
And forth is faring Hamor, the father of Shechem, to Jacob to speak with him.
And the sons of Jacob came from the field as they hear of it. And mortified are the mortals, and hot is their anger exceedingly, that decadence does he in Israel by lying with Jacob's daughter, for so is not being done.
And speaking is Hamor with them, saying, "My son Shechem's soul is attached to your daughter. Pray, give her to him for his wife.
And intermarry with us, and your daughters give to us, and our daughters shall you take for your sons.
And with us dwell. And the land, behold! Wide is it before you. Dwell, and be merchants on it, and have holdings in it."
And saying is Shechem to her father and to her brothers, "Finding am I grace in your eyes, then what you shall say to me will I give.
Increase on me exceedingly a bride-price and gift, and I will give as you shall say to me. Yet give to me the maiden for a wife."
And answering are the sons of Jacob to Shechem and Hamor, his father, with deceit. And speaking are they to those who had defiled Dinah, their sister.
And saying are Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brothers, sons of Leah, to them, "We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to a man who has a foreskin, for a reproach is that to us.
Yea, in this consent will we to you and dwell among you, if you become as we are by circumcising your every male.
And give would we our daughters to you, and your daughters will we take for us for wives, and we will dwell with you and we will become as one people.
And should you not hearken to us, to be circumcised, then we will take our daughter and go."
And good are their words in the eyes of Hamor and in the eyes of Shechem, son of Hamor.
And the youth does not delay to do the thing, for he delights in Jacob's daughter, and he is the most glorious of all the household of his father.
And coming are Hamor and Shechem, his son, to the gateway of their city, and speaking to the mortals of their city, saying,
 "These mortals, peaceable are they with us, and dwell will they in the land, and be merchants in it. And the land, behold! Wide is it on all hands before them. Their daughters will we take for us for wives, and our daughters will we give to them.
Yea, in this are the mortals consenting to us, to dwell with us, to become one people, by our circumcising every male, as they circumcise.
Their cattle and their acquisitions and all their beasts, will they not be ours? Yea, in this are we consenting to them, and they will dwell with us."
And hearkening to Hamor and to Shechem, his son, are all faring forth from the gateway of their city. And circumcised is the flesh of their foreskin of every male, all who are faring forth from the gateway of his city.
And coming is it on the third day, when they come to be in pain, taking are two sons of Jacob, Simeon, and Levi, Dinah's brothers, each man his sword, and coming are they to the trusting city, and killing are they every male.
And Hamor and Shechem, his son, they kill by the edge of the sword. And taking are they Dinah from the house of Shechem, and faring forth.
And the sons of Jacob come upon the violated, and plundering are they the city which defiled their sister Dinah.
And all their flocks and all their herds, and all their asses, and all that is in the city, and all that is in the field, they take.
And all their estate, and all their tots and their wives, they capture. And plundering are they all that is in the city and all that is in the houses.
And saying is Jacob to Simeon and to Levi, "You trouble me to make me stink among all the dwellers of the land, among the Canaanite and among the Perizzite. And I am death-doomed, outnumbered when gathered are they against me and smite me, and exterminated shall I be, I and my household."
Yet saying are they, "As with a prostitute may he deal with our sister?"
And saying is God to Jacob, "Rise, go up to the place at Beth-El and dwell there, and make there an altar to El Who appeared to you when you ran away from the face of Esau, your brother."
And saying is Jacob to his household and to all who are with him, "Take away the foreign God which are in your midst, and clean yourselves, and change your garments.
And rise will we and go up to Beth-El, and make will I there an altar to the El Who answered me in the day of my distress, and came to stand by me and saved me in the way which I went."
And giving are they to Jacob all the foreign God which are in their hand, and the pendants which are in their ears. And burying them is Jacob under the terebinth which is at Shechem.
And journeying is Israel out of Shechem. And coming is the dismay of God on the cities which surround them, and they do not pursue after the sons of Israel.
And coming is Jacob toward Luz, which is in the land of Canaan (it is Beth-El), he and all the people who are with him.
And building is he there an altar, and calling is he the name of the place Beth-El, for there God was revealed to him when he ran away from the face of Esau, his brother.
And dying is Deborah, Rebecca's wet-nurse, and entombed is she below Beth-El, under the oak. And calling is Jacob the name of it Alun-Bakuth.
And appearing is God to Jacob again in Luz, when he comes from Padan, Syria, and God is blessing him.
And saying to him is God, "Your name is Jacob. No longer is your name to be called Jacob, but rather Israel is coming to be your name." And calling is He his name Israel.
And saying to him is God, "I am the El-Who-Suffices. Be fruitful and increase. A nation and an assembly of nations shall come from you, and kings from your loins shall fare forth.
And the land which I gave to Abraham and to Isaac, to you am I giving it. Yours it is; and to your seed after you am I giving the land."
And ascending is God from him in the place in which He spoke with him.
And setting up is Jacob a monument in the place in which He spoke with him, a monument of stone. And libating is he on it a libation and pouring on it oil.
And calling is Jacob the name of the place where God spoke with him, Beth-El.
And journeying is Jacob from Beth-El, and it comes to be still some distance over land to come to Ephrath. And bearing is Rachel, and hard is she having it in her bearing.
And coming is it, as she has it hard in her bearing, then saying to her is the midwife, "You must not fear, for this, moreover, is a son for you!"
And coming is it, when forth fares her soul (for she died), that she is calling his name Ben-oni. Yet his father calls his name Benjamin.
And dying is Rachel, and is being entombed on the way to Ephrath. (It is now Bethlehem.)
And setting up is Jacob a monument over her tomb. It is the monument, the tomb of Rachel, till today.
And journeying is Israel, and stretching out his tent is he beyond the tower Edar.
And coming is it, when Israel tabernacles in that land, that going is Reuben and lying with Bilhah, his father's concubine. And hearing of it is Israel, and evil appears it in his eyes.
And coming are the sons of Jacob to be twelve: The sons of Leah, the firstborn of Jacob, Reuben, and Simeon and Levi and Judah and Issachar and Zebulon;
and the sons of Rachel, Joseph and Benjamin;
and the sons of Bilhah, Rachel's maid, Dan, and Naphtali;
and the sons of Zilpah, Leah's maid, Gad, and Ashur. These are the sons of Jacob, who are born to him in Padan, Syria.
And coming is Jacob to Isaac, his father, to Mamre, the town of Arba (It is now Hebron), in the land of Canaan, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.
And coming are the days of Isaac to be a hundred and eighty years.
And expiring is Isaac, and he died, and is gathered to his people, old and satisfied with days. And entombing him are Esau and Jacob, his sons.
And these are the genealogical annals of Esau (He is Edom):
Esau took his wives from the daughters of Canaan: Adah, the daughter of Elon, the Hittite; and Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah, the son of Zibeon, the Hivite;
and Bashemath, the daughter of Ishmael, sister of Nebaioth.
And bearing is Adah for Esau Eliphaz, and Bashemath bears Reuel,
and Aholibamah bears Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah. These are the sons of Esau, who were born for him in the land of Canaan.
And taking is Esau his wives and his sons and his daughters and all the souls of his household, and all his cattle and all his beasts and all his acquisitions, and all that he got in the land of Canaan, and going is he from the land of Canaan, from the face of Jacob, his brother,
for it comes that they get more than may dwell together, and the land of their sojourning cannot bear them, in view of the multitude of their cattle.
And dwelling is Esau in mount Seir. (Esau, he is Edom.)
And these are the genealogical annals of Esau, father of Edom, in mount Seir:
And these are the names of Esau's sons: Eliphaz, son of Adah, wife of Esau; Reuel, son of Bashemath, wife of Esau.
And coming to be sons of Eliphaz are Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz.
And Timno becomes a concubine of Eliphaz, Esau's son, and bearing is she for Eliphaz Amelek. These are the sons of Adah, wife of Esau.
And these are the sons of Reuel: Nahas and Zerah, Shammah and Mizzah. These come to be the sons of Bashemath, wife of Esau.
And these come to be the sons of Aholibamah, daughter of Anah, son of Zibeon, wife of Esau: And bearing is she for Esau Jeush and Jaalam, and Korah.
These are the sheiks of the sons of Esau: The sons of Eliphaz, the firstborn of Esau, sheik Teman, sheik Omar, sheik Zepho, sheik Kenaz,
sheik Korah, sheik Gatam, sheik Amalek. These are the sheiks of Eliphaz in the land of Edom. These are the sons of Adah.
And these are the sons of Reuel, son of Esau: sheik Nahas, sheik Zerah, sheik Shammah, sheik Mizzah. These are the sheiks of Reuel, in the land of Edom. These are the sons of Bashemath, wife of Esau.
And these are the sons of Aholibamah, wife of Esau: sheik Jeush, sheik Jaalam, sheik Korah. These are the sheiks of Aholibamah, daughter of Anah, wife of Esau.
These are the sons of Esau, and these are their sheiks. These are the sons of Edom.
And these are the sons of Seir, the Horite, dwellers of the land: Lotan and Shobal and Zibeon and Anah
and Dishon and Ezer and Rishan. These are the sheiks of the Horites, sons of Seir, in the land of Edom.
And coming to be sons of Lotan are Hori and Hemam. And the sister of Lotan is Timno.
And these are the sons of Shobal: Alvan and Manahas and Ebal and Shepho and Onam.
And these are the sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah. He is the Anah who found the hot springs in the wilderness when grazing the asses of Zibeon, his father.
And these are the sons of Anah: Dishon and Aholibamah, daughter of Anah.
And these are the sons of Dishon: Hemdan and Eshban and Ithran and Cheran.
And these are the sons of Ezer: Bilhan and Zaavan and Ioukam and Akan.
And these are the sons of Rishan: Uz and Aran.
These are the sheiks of the Horites: sheik Lotan, sheik Shobal, sheik Zibeon, sheik Anah,
sheik Dishon, sheik Ezer, sheik Rishan. These are the sheiks of the Horites, for their sheiks in the land of Seir.
And these are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom, before a king reigned for the sons of Israel:
And reigning in Edom is Bela, son of Beor. And the name of his city is Dinhabah.
And Bela died. And reigning in his stead is Jobab, son of Zerah, from Bozrah.
And Jobab died. And reigning in his stead is Husham from the land of the Temanites.
And Husham died. And reigning in his stead is Hadad, son of Bedad who smote Midian in the field of Moab. And the name of his city is Avith.
And Hadad died. And reigning in his stead is Samlah from Masrekah.
And Samlah died. And reigning in his stead is Saul from Rehoboth by the stream.
And Saul died. And reigning in his stead is Baalhanan, son of Achbor.
And Baalhanan, son of Achbor, died. And reigning in his stead is Hadad, son of Bered. And the name of his city is Pau. And the name of his wife is Mehetabel, daughter of Matred, son of Mezahab.
And these are the names of the sheiks of Esau, their families, for their places in their lands, by their names: sheik Timno, sheik Alvah, sheik Jetheth,
sheik Aholibamah, sheik Elah, sheik Pinon,
sheik Kenaz, sheik Teman, sheik Mibzar,
sheik Magdiel, sheik Iram. These are the sheiks of Edom, for their dwelling places, in the land of their freehold. He is Esau, father of Edom.
And dwelling is Jacob in the land of his father's sojournings, in the land of Canaan.
These are the genealogical annals of Jacob. Joseph, seventeen years of age, comes to be grazing the flock with his brothers, and he, the lad, is with the sons of Bilhah and the sons of Zilpah, wives of his father. And bringing is Joseph their evil mutterings to Israel, their father.
And Israel loves Joseph more than any other of his sons, for a son of his old age is he, to him. And he makes for him a distinctive tunic.
And seeing are his brothers that their father loves him more than any other of his sons. And hating him are they and cannot speak peaceably to him.
And dreaming is Joseph a dream. And telling it is he to his brothers. And continuing further are they in their hatred of him.
And saying is he to them, "Hear, pray, this dream which I dreamed.
And, behold! We are compressing shocks in the midst of the field. And behold! Rising is my shock, and, moreover, takes its station. And, behold! Surrounding it are your shocks, and prostrating to my shock!"
And saying to him are his brothers, "Verily reign over us shall you? And should you verily rule among us?" And continuing further are they to hate him on account of his dreams, and on account of his words.
And dreaming is he still another dream. And relating is he it to his father and to his brothers, and is saying, "Behold! I dream a further dream. And behold! The sun and the moon and the eleven stars are prostrating to me."
And relating it is he to his father and to his brothers. And rebuking him is his father, and saying to him, "What dream is this which you dream? Shall I and your mother and your brothers come, yea, come to prostrate to you to the earth?"
And jealous are his brothers of him, yet his father keeps the word.
And going are his brothers to graze their father's flock in Shechem.
And saying is Israel to Joseph, "Are not your brothers grazing in Shechem? Go. Send you will I to them." And saying is he to him, "Behold me!"
And saying to him is Israel, "Go, pray, and see if it is well with your brothers, and well with the flock, and return me word." And sending him is he from the vale of Hebron. And coming is he to Shechem.
And finding him is a man, and, behold! Straying is he in the field. And asking him is the man saying, "What are you seeking?"
And saying is he, "My brothers am I seeking. Tell me, pray, whereat they are grazing."
And saying is the man, "They journeyed hence, for I heard them saying, `Go will we to Doesan.'" And going is Joseph after his brothers, and is finding them in Doesan.
And seeing him are they from afar, and ere he is coming near to them. And plotting are they against him among themselves to put him to death.
And saying is each man to his brother, "Behold! This possessor of dreams is coming!
And now go, and we will kill him and fling him into one of the cisterns and say, `An evil animal devoured him,' and see will we what will become of his dreams."
And hearing of it is Reuben, and rescuing him is he out of their hands. And saying is he, "Not smite will we his soul."
And saying to them is Reuben, "You must not shed blood. Fling him into this cistern which is in the wilderness, yet a hand you, you must not stretch out against him," that he may rescue him from their hands, to restore him to his father.
And coming is it, as Joseph comes to his brothers, that they are stripping Joseph of his tunic, the distinctive tunic which is on him.
And taking him are they, and flinging him into the cistern. Yet the cistern was empty. No water was in it.
And sitting down are they to eat bread. And lifting are they their eyes and seeing, and behold! A caravan of Ishmaelites are coming from Gilead with their camels, bearing perfume and balm and labdanum, going by to go down to Egypt.
And saying is Judah to his brothers, "What gain is it that we kill our brother and cover his blood?
Go, and we will sell him to the Ishmaelites, and our hand must not come to be against him, for our brother and our flesh is he." And hearkening are his brothers.
And passing are mortals, Midianites, merchants. And drawing are they and bringing up Joseph from the cistern, and are selling Joseph to the Ishmaelites for twenty silverlings. And bringing are they Joseph to Egypt.
And returning is Reuben to the cistern, and behold! No Joseph is in the cistern. And tearing is he his garments.
And returning is he to his brothers and is saying, "The boy! There is no one! And I! Whither can I come?"
And taking are they Joseph's tunic, and slaying a hairy one of the goats, and dipping the tunic in the blood.
And sending are they the distinctive tunic, and they are bringing it to their father. And saying are they, "This we found. Pray identify the tunic, if it is not your son's."
And identifying it is he and saying, "The tunic of my son! An evil animal has devoured him! Joseph is torn to pieces, yea, to pieces!"
And tearing is Jacob his garments, and is placing sackcloth on his waist, and is mourning over his son many days.
And rising are all his sons and all his daughters and they come to console him, yet refusing is he to be consoled and is saying that, "Descend will I to my son, to the unseen, mourning." And lamenting over him is his father.
And the Midianites sell Joseph to Egypt, to Potiphar, a eunuch of Pharaoh, chief of the executioners.
And coming is it at that season that down is Judah going from his brothers and is turning aside unto a man, an Adullamite, and his name is Hirah.
And seeing is Judah there the daughter of a man of the Canaanites, and his name is Shua. And taking her is he and is coming to her.
And pregnant is she and is bearing a son, and calling is she his name Er.
And pregnant is she further and is bearing a son, and is calling his name Onan.
And continuing further is she and bearing a son, and calling his name Shelah. And she comes to be in Chezib when bearing them.
And taking is Judah a wife for Er, his firstborn, and her name is Thamar.
And coming is it that Er, Judah's firstborn, is evil in the eyes of YHVH, and YHVH is putting him to death.
And saying is Judah to Onan, "Come to your brother's wife and wed her, your brother's widow, and raise seed for your brother."
And know does Onan that the seed will not become his. And it comes, when he is coming to his brother's wife, then he ruins it on the earth, to avoid giving seed to his brother.
And evil in the eyes of YHVH is what he does, and, moreover, He is putting him to death also.
And saying is Judah to Thamar, his daughter-in-law, "Dwell a widow at your father's house till my son Shelah shall be grown. For," says he, "lest he, moreover, will die as his brothers." And going is Thamar and dwelling in her father's house.
And increasing are the days, and the daughter of Shua, Judah's wife, died. And consoled is Judah, and going up is he to the shearers of his flock, he and his shepherd, Hirah, the Adullamite, to Timnah.
And told is it to Thamar, saying, "Behold! Your husband's father is going up to Timnah to the shearing of his flock."
And away is she taking the garments of her widowhood off her, and is covering herself with a veil and she is bedecking herself. And sitting is she at the opening to the springs, which are on the way to Timnah, for she sees that Shelah is grown, and she is not given to him for a wife.
And seeing her is Judah, and is accounting her to be a prostitute, for she covers her face, and he did not recognize her.
And aside is he turning to her by the way, and is saying to her, "Prithee, pray, coming am I to you," for not know does he that she is his daughter-in-law. And saying is she, "What will you give to me that you shall come to me?"
And saying is he, "I will send to you a kid of the goats from the flock." And saying is she, "If you will give a surety till you send."
And saying is he, "What is the surety which I shall give to you?" And saying is she, "Your seal and your twist and your staff which is in your hand." And giving them is he to her, and is coming to her, and pregnant is she by him.
And rising is she and going, and is taking away her veil off her and is putting on the garments of her widowhood.
And sending is Judah the kid of the goats by the hand of his shepherd, the Adullamite, to take the surety from the hand of the woman. Yet he did not find her.
And asking is he the mortals of her place, saying, "Where is the hallowed harlot, she at the springs, on the way?" And saying are they, "No hallowed harlot came to be in this place."
And returning is he to Judah and saying, "I did not find her. And, moreover, the mortals of the place say, `No hallowed harlot came to be in this place.'"
And saying is Judah, "Take it to her shall she, lest we come into contempt! Behold! I send this kid and you did not find her!"
And coming is it, about three months from this, that it is being told Judah, saying, "Your daughter-in-law Thamar commits prostitution, and moreover, behold! Pregnant is she by prostitutions." And saying is Judah, "Bring her forth, and burned shall she be."
Forth is she brought. Yet she sends to her husband's father, saying, "By the man whose these are am I pregnant." And saying is she, "Identify, pray, whose these are: the seal and the twist and the staff."
And identifying them is Judah, and is saying, "More just is Thamar than I, therefore, for I did not give her to Shelah, my son." Yet not continue does he to know her further.
And coming is it, at the time of her bearing, that, behold! Twins are in her belly.
And coming is it, in her bearing that one is putting out a hand. And taking it is the midwife and tying on his hand a double-dipped token, saying, "This fares forth first."
And coming is it, as his hand is returning, then, behold! Forth fares his brother. And saying is she, "What! Breached have you. On you be the breach!" And calling is she his name Pharez.
And afterward forth comes his brother, who had on his hand the double-dipped token. And calling is she his name Zarah.
And Joseph was brought down to Egypt. And bought is he by Potiphar, a eunuch of Pharaoh, chief of the executioners, an Egyptian man, from the hand of the Ishmaelites who had brought him down there.
And coming is YHVH to be with Joseph, and becoming is he a prosperous man. And coming is he to be in the house of his lord, the Egyptian.
And seeing is his lord that YHVH is with him and that all that he is doing YHVH is prospering in his hand.
And finding is Joseph grace in the eyes of his lord, and ministering is he to him. And making him is he supervisor over his household, and all, forsooth, which is his he gives into Joseph's hand.
And coming is it, since he makes him supervisor in his house and over all, forsooth, that is his, that YHVH is blessing the Egyptian's household due to Joseph, and coming is YHVH's blessing to be over all, forsooth, which is his, in the house and in the field.
And leaving is he all that is his in the hand of Joseph. And naught knows he of his, save the bread which he is eating. And coming is Joseph to have a lovely shape and a lovely appearance.
And coming is it after these things, that lifting is the wife of his lord her eyes to Joseph and is saying, "Lie with me."
And refusing is he, and saying to his lord's wife, "Behold! My lord knows naught of me in the house, and all, forsooth, that is his he gives into my hand.
No one is greater in this house than I, and he has not kept back aught from me save you, in that you are his wife. And how shall I do this great evil and sin against God?"
And coming is it, as she speaks to Joseph day by day, that he does not hearken to her to lie beside her, to be with her.
And coming is a day as this, and coming is Joseph to the house to do his work, and no man of the mortals of the household is there in the house.
And grasping him is she by his cloak, saying, "Lie with me!" And leaving is he his cloak in her hand, and fleeing, and faring forth outside.
And coming is it, as she sees that he leaves his cloak in her hand and is fleeing and faring forth outside,
that calling is she to the mortals of her household and is speaking to them, saying, "See! He brings to us a man, a Hebrew to laugh at us. He comes to me saying, `Lie with me,' and calling am I with a loud voice.
And coming is it, as he hears that I raise high my voice and am calling, that he is leaving his cloak beside me and is fleeing and faring forth outside."
And leaving is she his cloak beside her till his lord comes to his house.
And speaking is she to him according to these words, saying, "There came to me the Hebrew servant whom you brought to us, to laugh at me, and said to me, `Lie with me.'
And coming is it, as I raise high my voice and am calling, that he is leaving his cloak beside me and is fleeing and is faring forth outside."
And coming is it, as his lord hears the words of his wife, which she speaks to him, saying, "According to these words does your servant to me," that hot is his anger.
And Joseph's lord is taking him and is giving him over to the round-house, the place in which the king's prisoners are bound. And coming is he to be there in the round-house.
Yet coming is YHVH to be with Joseph, and He is stretching out to him in kindness and is giving him grace in the eyes of the chief of the round-house.
And the chief of the round-house is giving into the hand of Joseph all the prisoners who are in the round-house. And all that is being done there, he comes to be the doer.
Naught is the chief of the round-house prison seeing of all that is in his hand, in that YHVH is with him, and all that he is doing YHVH is prospering.
And coming is it, after these things, that sinned have the chief cupbearer of the king of Egypt, and the chief baker against their lord, the king of Egypt.
And wroth is Pharaoh over his two eunuchs, over the chief of the cupbearers and over the chief of the bakers.
And giving them is he over in ward in the house of the chief of the executioners, to the round-house, the place where Joseph was bound.
And the chief of the executioners gives Joseph the supervision over them, and he is ministering to them. And coming are they to be some days in ward.
And dreaming are both a dream. Each man has his dream in the same night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the chief cupbearer and the chief baker, who are the king of Egypt's who are bound in the round-house.
And coming to them is Joseph in the morning, and he is seeing them. And, behold! They are turbulent!
And asking is he Pharaoh's eunuchs, who are with him in the ward of his lord's house, saying, "For what reason are your faces evil today?"
And saying are they to him, "A dream we dream, and there is no interpreting of it." And saying is Joseph to them, "Do not interpretations belong to God? Relate them, pray, to me."
And relating is the chief cupbearer his dream to Joseph and is saying to him, "In my dream, behold! A vine is before me.
And in the vine are three intertwining branches. And it seems as if budding. Up come blossoms. Ripening are its clusters of grapes.
And the cup of Pharaoh is in my hand. And taking am I the grapes and pressing them into Pharaoh's cup. And giving am I the cup into Pharaoh's hand."
And saying to him is Joseph, "This is its interpretation: The three intertwined branches, three days are they.
In further three days Pharaoh will lift up your head, and restore you to your post, and you shall give Pharaoh's cup into his hand, according to the former custom, by which you became his cupbearer.
 "For, remember me should you when it is well with you, then, pray, deal withal in kindness, and mention me to Pharaoh, and bring me forth from this house,
for verily, stolen was I from the land of the Hebrews, and moreover, here have I done naught that they should place me in this cistern."
And seeing is the chief of the bakers that he interprets well. And saying is he to Joseph. "Indeed, I dreamed in my dream and, behold! Three days of cereal food is on my head.
And in the uppermost tray are some of all food for Pharaoh, the king, made by baking. And the flyers of the heavens are eating them from the tray, off my head."
And answering is Joseph and saying to him, "This is its interpretation: The three trays, three days are they.
In further three days, lift will Pharaoh your head off of you, and hang you on a tree. And the flyers of the heavens shall eat your flesh off of you."
And coming is it on the third day, the birthday of Pharaoh, that he is making a feast for all his servants. And lifting up is he the head of the chief of the cupbearers, and the head of the chief of the bakers in the midst of his servants.
And restoring is he the chief of the cupbearers to his cupbearing, and giving is he the cup into the hand of Pharaoh.
Yet the chief of the bakers he hangs, according as Joseph had interpreted to them.
Yet the chief of the cupbearers did not remember Joseph, and forgetting him is he.
And coming is it at the end of two years to a day that Pharaoh dreams and, behold! Standing is he at the waterway.
And, behold! From the waterway are coming up seven young cows, lovely in appearance and plump of flesh. And grazing are they in the marsh grass.
And, behold! Seven other young cows are coming up after them from the waterway, evil in appearance and thin of flesh. And standing are they beside the young cows on the shore of the waterway.
And eating are the seven young cows, evil in appearance and thin of flesh, the seven young cows, lovely in appearance and plump. And waking is Pharaoh.
And sleeping is he and dreaming a second time. And, behold! Seven spikes are coming up on one reed, plump and good.
And behold! Seven other spikes, thin and blasted by the burning east wind are sprouting after them.
And up are swallowing the seven spikes, thin and blasted by the east wind, the seven plump and full spikes. And waking is Pharaoh. And, behold! A dream was it.
And coming is it in the morning that agitated is his spirit, and sending is he and calling all the sacred scribes of Egypt and all the wise men. And relating is Pharaoh to them his dream. Yet no one is there to interpret it for Pharaoh.
And speaking is the chief of the cupbearers to Pharaoh, saying, "Of my sin am I reminded today.
Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and gave us in ward in the house of the chief of the executioners, me and the chief of the bakers.
And dreaming are we a dream in the same night, I and he. Each man dreamed according to the interpretation of his dream.
And there with us was a Hebrew lad, a servant of the chief of the executioners. And we related them to him and he is interpreting for us our dreams. For each man, according to his dream, he interpreted.
And coming is it that, as he interpreted to us, so it comes to be. Me he restores to my post, and him he hanged."
And sending is Pharaoh and calling Joseph. And running him are they from the cistern. And shaving is he and changing his garments, and coming to Pharaoh.
And saying is Pharaoh to Joseph, "A dream I dream, and there is no one to interpret it. And I hear say of you, that you, hearing a dream, interpret it."
And answering Pharaoh is Joseph saying, "Apart from God there is no answer for the welfare of Pharaoh."
And speaking is Pharaoh to Joseph saying, "In my dream, behold me standing on the shore of the waterway.
And behold! From the waterway are coming up seven young cows, plump of flesh and lovely in shape. And grazing are they in the marsh grass.
And, behold! Seven other young cows are coming up from the waterway after them, poor and exceedingly evil in shape, and emaciated of flesh. Not seen have I such as they in all the land of Egypt, so evil.
And eating are the seven emaciated and evil young cows the first seven lovely and plump young cows,
and coming are they into their inwards, yet not known is it that they come into their inwards, and their appearance is evil, as at the start. And awaking am I.
And I sleep and am seeing again in my dream, and, behold! Seven spikes are coming up on one reed, full and good.
And, behold! Seven other spikes, puny, thin, and blasted by the burning east wind, sprouting after them.
And swallowing up are the seven thin spikes. And stating this am I to the sacred scribes, and there is no one telling me what it is."
And saying is Joseph to Pharaoh, "The dream of Pharaoh, one is it. What God will be doing He tells to Pharaoh.
The seven good young cows, seven years are they; and the seven good spikes, seven years are they. The dream of Pharaoh, one is it.
And the seven emaciated and evil young cows coming up after them, seven years are they. And the seven empty spikes, blasted by the burning east wind, are coming to be seven years of famine.
It is the word which I speak to Pharaoh: What God will do He shows to Pharaoh.
Behold! Seven years are coming of great satisfaction in all the land of Egypt.
Yet rise will seven years of famine after them. And forgotten will be all the satisfaction in all the land of Egypt, and finish will the famine the land.
And not known shall be the satisfaction in the land, in view of the famine that is afterward, for heavy will it be exceedingly.
And on account of the repetition of the dream to Pharaoh twice, it is that the matter is established with God. And God will hasten His doing of it.
 "And now, see will Pharaoh to a man of understanding and wisdom, and set him over the land of Egypt.
Doing this will Pharaoh, and he will give the supervision to supervisors over the land and a fifth of all the produce of the land of Egypt will they take in the seven years of satisfaction.
And get together shall they all the food of these seven coming good years, and heap up cereals under the hand of Pharaoh for food in the cities, and keep it.
And the food shall come to be supervised in the land for the seven years of the famine which shall come to be in the land of Egypt, and so the land shall not be cut off by the famine."
And good is the matter in the eyes of Pharaoh and in the eyes of all his servants.
And saying is Pharaoh to his servants, "Find will we one as this man, who has the spirit of God in him?"
And saying is Pharaoh to Joseph, "After God has made known to you all this, there is no one as understanding and wise as you.
You shall be over my household, and at your bidding all my people shall bear weapons. But on the throne will I be greater than you."
And saying is Pharaoh to Joseph, "See! Given you have I today to be over all the land of Egypt."
And taking off from his hand his ring is Pharaoh, and is putting it on the hand of Joseph. And clothing him is he in garments of cambric sheen, and is placing a knitted collar of gold on his neck,
and is having him ride in the second chariot which he has. And calling are they before him, "Kneel!" And he gives him to be over all the land of Egypt.
And saying is Pharaoh to Joseph, "I am Pharaoh, and apart from you shall no man raise his hand or his foot in all the land of Egypt."
And calling is Pharaoh Joseph's name Zaphnath-paaneah. And giving him is he Asenath, daughter of Potiphera, priest of On, for a wife. And forth is Joseph faring over the land of Egypt.
And Joseph is thirty years old when he stands before Pharaoh, king of Egypt. And forth is Joseph faring from the face of Pharaoh, and passing through all the land of Egypt.
And yielding is the land in the seven years of satisfaction, by fistfuls.
And getting together is he all the food of the seven years of satisfaction which come to be in the land of Egypt. And bestowing is he the food in the cities. The food of the field of the city which surrounds it, he bestows in its midst.
And heaping up is Joseph cereals as the sand of the sea, multiplied exceedingly furthermore, so that he leaves off numbering, for there is no numbering it.
And to Joseph are born two sons, ere the seven famine years are coming, whom Asenath, daughter of Potiphera, priest of On, bears for him.
And calling is Joseph the name of the firstborn Manasseh, for "God makes me oblivious of all my toil and all my father's household."
And the name of the second he calls Ephraim, for "God makes me fruitful in the land of my humiliation."
And concluding are the seven years of satisfaction, which come to be in the land of Egypt,
and starting to come are the seven years of famine, as Joseph had said. And coming is the famine in all the lands, yet in all the land of Egypt there comes to be bread.
When famishing is all the land of Egypt, then crying are the people to Pharaoh for bread. And saying is Pharaoh to all Egypt, "Go to Joseph, and what he will say to you, be doing."
And the famine comes to be on the surface of all the earth. And opening is Joseph all the cereal stores which are among them, and is retailing to all Egypt. And the famine is holding fast in the land of Egypt.
And all lands come to Egypt to Joseph to purchase, for fast is the famine holding in all the earth.
And seeing is Jacob that, forsooth, there are victuals in Egypt. And saying is Jacob to his sons, "Why are you staring at one another?"
And saying is he, "Behold! I hear, forsooth, that there are victuals in Egypt. Go down there and purchase for us thence a little food that we will live, and not die."
And down are going ten brothers of Joseph to purchase cereals from Egypt.
Yet Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob does not send with his brothers, for, says he, "Lest meet will he with a mishap."
And coming are the sons of Israel to purchase in the midst of the comers, for the famine comes to be in the land of Canaan.
And Joseph, he has authority over the land. He is the retailer to all the people of the land. And coming are the brothers of Joseph and prostrating to him, nostrils to the earth.
And seeing is Joseph his brothers, and is recognizing them. Yet foreign makes he himself to them, and is speaking with them obstinately, and is saying to them, "Whence come you?" And saying are they, "From the land of Canaan, to purchase food."
And recognizing is Joseph his brothers, yet they do not recognize him.
And remembering is Joseph the dreams which he dreamed concerning them. And saying is he to them, "Spies are you. To see the nakedness of the land you come."
And saying are they to him, "No, my lord. And your servants come to purchase food.
All of us, sons of one man are we. Established are we. Not spies are your servants."
And saying is he to them, "No. For the nakedness of the land you come to see."
And saying are they, "Your servants, twelve brothers are we, sons of one man in the land of Canaan. And, behold! The small is with our father today, and one is not."
And saying to them is Joseph, "It is what I speak to you, saying, `Spies are you.'
By this will you be tested. By the life of Pharaoh, should you fare forth hence, save you small brother come hither !
Send one of you, and he shall take your brother here, and you shall be bound, and your words shall be tested, whether the truth is with you. And should it not be, by the life of Pharaoh ! For spies are you." And saying are they, "The youth cannot leave his father. When he leaves his father, then he will die."
And gathering them is he into a ward three days.
And saying to them is Joseph on the third day, "This do and live. God fear I.
If you are established, one of your brothers shall be bound in the house of your ward. And you go and bring the victuals you have purchased for the famine of your households.
And your small brother you shall bring to me. And if faithful be found your words, then you shall not die." And doing so are they.
And saying are they, each man to his brother, "Nevertheless, guilty are we on account of our brother when we saw the distress of his soul, when he supplicated us and we did not hearken. Therefore comes on us all this distress."
And answering them is Reuben, saying, "Did not I speak to you, saying, `You must not sin against the boy'? And not hearken did you. And, moreover, behold! His blood is required."
Yet they do not know that Joseph is hearing, for the translator is between them.
And around is Joseph going, away from them, and is weeping. And returning is he to them, and is speaking to them. And taking is he from them Simeon and is binding him before their eyes.
And instruction is Joseph giving, when they are filling their vessels with cereals, to return his money to each man in his sack. And to give them provisions for the way. And done is it to them so.
And up are they lifting their victuals on their asses, and going are they thence.
And opening is one his sack to give provender to his ass in the lodging, and seeing is he his money pouch, and behold! It is in the mouth of his bag!
And saying is he to his brothers, "Restored is my money, and, moreover, it is in my bag!" And forth is faring their heart and trembling are they, each man saying to his brother, "What is this that God does to us?"
And coming are they to Jacob, their father, to the land of Canaan, and are telling him all that had befallen them, saying,
 "The man, the lord of the land, spoke to us obstinately, and gave us over in ward as spies of the land.
And we said to him, `Established are we. Not come have we to spy.
Twelve are we, brothers, sons of our father. One is not, and the small is today with our father in the land of Canaan.'
And saying to us is the man, the lord of the land, `By this shall I know that you are established. Your brothers, one leave be with me. And the victuals you have purchased for the famine of your households, take and go.
And bring your small brother to me, then I will know that you are not spies, for established are you. Your brother will I give back to you, and in the land shall you be merchants.'"
And coming is it, at their emptying their sacks, behold! Each man's money pouch is in his sack. And seeing are they and their father the pouches with their money, and are fearful.
And saying to them is Jacob, their father, "Me you bereave! Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and Benjamin you will take! On me come all these things."
And speaking is Reuben to his father, saying, "Two of my sons put to death should I not bring him back to you. Give him into my hand, and I will restore him to you."
And saying is he, "Not go down with you shall my son, for his brother is dead, and he alone remains. And meets him a mishap in the way in which you will go, then down will you bring my gray hairs with affliction to the unseen."
And the famine is heavy in the land.
And coming is it, as they finish eating the victuals which they had brought from Egypt, then saying to them is their father, "Return. Purchase for us a little food."
And speaking to him is Judah, saying, "The man testified, yea, testified to us, saying, `You shall not see my face, if your small brother fails to be with you!'
Should you, forsooth, send our brother with us, down will we go and purchase food for you.
Yet should you not be sending our brother with us, we will not go down, for the man said to us, `You shall not see my face if your small brother fails to be with you!'"
And saying is Israel, "Why did you do evil to me by telling the man you have still another brother?"
And saying are they, "In his asking, the man asked concerning us and concerning our kindred, saying, `Still is your father living? Forsooth, have you a brother?' And we told him, at his bidding these matters of which he asked. Did we know, yea, know that he would say to us, `Bring down your brother'?"
And saying is Judah to Israel, his father, "Send the youth with me, and we will rise and go, and live and not die, both we, and you and our tots.
I will be surety for him. From my hand shall you seek him. Should I not bring him to you and put him before you, then I sin against you all my days.
For, were we not obliged to dally, by now we had returned this twice."
And saying to them is Israel, their father, "If so, indeed, do this: Take from the pruned fruit trees of the land in your vessels, and take down to the man a present offering, a little balm and a little honey, perfume and labdanum, pistachio nuts and almonds.
And money, duplicated, take in your hand, and the money that was restored in the mouth of your bags, restore by your hand. Perhaps it was an error.
And your brother take, and rise and return to the man.
And the El-Who-Suffices give you compassion before the man, so that he lets your other brother and Benjamin go! And I, as I am bereaved, am I bereaved!"
And taking are the mortals this present offering and duplicate money take they in their hand, and Benjamin. And rising and going down are they to Egypt. And standing are they before Joseph.
And seeing them is Joseph, and Benjamin, his brother, his mother's son, and saying is he to him who is over his household, "Bring the mortals to the house, and slaughter a slaughter and make ready, for with me shall the mortals eat bread at noon."
And doing is the man as Joseph says. And bringing is the man the mortals to Joseph's house.
And fearful are the mortals, for they are brought to Joseph's house. And saying are they, "On account of the matter of the money returned in our bags at the start are we being brought, to roll himself upon us, and to fall upon us, to take us for servants, and our asses."
And close are they coming to the man who is over Joseph's household, and speaking are they to him at the portal of the house.
And saying are they, "O! my lord. Down, yea, down came we at the start to purchase food.
And it came that we come to the lodging and opened our bags, and, behold! The money of each man was in the mouth of his bag, our money by its weight, yet we will restore it with our hands.
And other money have we brought down in our hand to purchase food. Not know do we who placed our money in our bags."
And saying is he, "Peace be to you! You must not be fearful. Your God and God of your forefathers gave you buried treasure in your bags. Your money came to me."
And forth is he bringing Simeon to them. And bringing is the man the mortals to Joseph's house. And giving them is he water, and washing are they their feet. And giving is he provender to their asses.
And preparing are they the present offering, till the coming of Joseph at noon, for they hear that they shall eat bread there.
And coming home is Joseph, and bringing are they the present offering which is in their hand to the house to him, and prostrating are they to him with their nostrils to the earth.
And asking them is he as to their welfare, and saying to them, "The welfare of your father, the old man of whom you were speaking; still living is he?"
And saying are they, "Well fares your servant, our father. Still living is he." And he said, "Blessed be that man by God!" And bowing are they the head and prostrating to him.
And lifting is Joseph his eyes and seeing Benjamin, his brother, his mother's son. And saying is he, "Is this your small brother of whom you said you would bring him to me?" And saying is he, "God be gracious to you, my son!"
And hastening is Joseph, for fervid is his compassion for his brother, and seeking is he to weep. And entering is he his chamber and is weeping there.
And washing is he his face and faring forth. And checking himself is he, and saying "Place on bread."
And placing are they for him alone and for them alone, for the Egyptians are eating with him alone, for the Egyptians cannot eat bread with Hebrews, for that is an abhorrence to the Egyptians.
And sitting are they before him, the firstborn according to his birthright and the inferior in station according to his inferior estate. And amazed are the mortals, each man at his associate.
And lifting up is he helpings, from before him, for them, and much more is Benjamin's helping than all their helpings by five handfuls. And drinking are they with him and are gratified.
And instructing is Joseph him who is over his household, saying, "Fill the bags of the mortals with food, as much as they can lift, and place the money of each man in the mouth of his bag.
And my beaker, the silver beaker shall you place in the mouth of the bag of the small one with his victual money." And doing is he according to the word which Joseph speaks.
When the morning is light, the mortals are sent away, they and their asses.
They fare forth, not far from the city, and Joseph says to him who is over his household, "Rise! Pursue after the mortals and overtake them and say to them, `Why do you repay evil for good? Why did you steal my silver beaker?
Is not this that from which my lord drinks? And he, when he augurs, auguring is he in it. Evil do you in what you do'."
And overtaking them is he, and is speaking to them these words.
And saying are they to him, "Why is my lord speaking words as these? Far be it from your servants to do according to this word.
Behold! The money which we found in the mouths of our bags we restored to you from the land of Canaan. And how shall we steal from your lord's house silver or gold?
Whoever of your servants shall be found with it shall die. And, moreover, we will become my lord's servants."
And saying is he, "Even now, according to your words, so be it. The man with whom the beaker shall be found, he becomes my servant, and you shall be innocent."
And hasting are they, and letting each man's bag down to the earth, and opening are they each man, his bag.
And searching is he, starting with the greatest and finishing with the small. And found is the beaker in the bag of Benjamin.
And tearing are they their garments, and lading is each man his bag on his ass, and returning are they to the city.
And coming are Judah and his brothers to Joseph's house, and he is still there. And falling are they before him to the earth.
And saying to them is Joseph, "What deed is this that you do? Not know, do you, that, by augury a man such as I am, is auguring?"
And saying is Judah, "What shall we say to my lord? What shall we speak? And with what shall we justify ourselves? God has found the depravity of your servants. Behold us, servants of my lord, both we and he in whose hand the beaker was found."
And saying is Joseph, "Far be it from me to do this! The man in whose hand the beaker was found, he shall become my servant. And you, go in peace to your father."
And close is Judah coming to him and saying, "O! my lord, Pray, speak will your servant a word in the ears of my lord, and your anger must not be hot against your servant, seeing that such a one as you are as Pharaoh.
My lord asked his servants saying, "Forsooth, have you a father or a brother?'
And said we to my lord, `Forsooth, we have a father, old, and a boy of his old age, the small and his brother is dead, and left is he alone of his mother, and his father loves him.
And said you to your servants, `Bring him down to me that I may place my eyes upon him.'
And said we to my lord, "The youth cannot leave his father. And, leaves he his father, he also will die.'
Yet you said to your servants, `Should not your small brother come down with you, you shall not continue to see my face.'
And coming is it that we went up to your servant, our father, and we told him the words of my lord.
And saying is our father, `Return. Purchase for us a little food.'
And said we, `We cannot go down. Should, forsooth, our small brother go down with us, then we will go down, for we cannot see the man's face if our small brother is not with us.'
 "And saying is your servant, our father, to us, `You know that two were borne for me by my wife.
And forth is one faring from me. And saying am I, "Yea, as prey is he torn to pieces!" And not seen him have I hitherto.
And take this one, moreover, from before my face, and a mishap befalls him on the way, down will you bring my gray hairs by evil to the unseen.'
 "And now, as I come to your servant, our father, and the youth is not with us, when his soul is tied to his soul,
and it comes as he sees that no youth is with us, he will die, and down will your servants bring the gray hairs of your servant, our father, by affliction to the unseen.
For your servant became surety for the youth with my father, saying, `Should I not bring him to you and set him before you, I sin against my father all my days.'
 "And now, dwell, pray, will your servant, instead of the youth, a servant to my lord, and the youth shall go up with his brothers.
For how shall I go up to my father, and the youth is not with us, lest I shall see the evil which will find my father?"
Yet Joseph cannot check himself before all who are stationed about him. And calling is he, "Forth go every man from me!" And no man stands with him while Joseph makes himself known to his brothers.
And giving is he his voice to lamentation. And hearing are all the Egyptians. And hearing is the household of Pharaoh.
And saying is Joseph to his brothers, "I am Joseph. Still is my father living?" And his brothers cannot answer him, for flustered are they by his presence.
And saying is Joseph to his brothers, "Come close, pray, to me." And close are they coming. And saying is he, "I am Joseph, your brother, whom you sold to Egypt.
 "And now, you must not grieve, and it must not be hot in your eyes, that you sell me hither, for to preserve life God sends me before you.
 "For this two years the famine is within the land, and there are still five years in which there is no plowing or harvesting.
 "And sending me is God before you to constitute you a remnant in the earth and to preserve your lives for a great deliverance.
And now, not you send me hither, for it was God. And constituting me is He a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his household, and ruler in all the land of Egypt.
 "Hasten and go up to my father, and say to him, `Thus says your son Joseph, "God has constituted me lord of all the land of Egypt. Come down to me. You must not stay there.
And dwell in the land of Goshen and come to be near to me, you and your sons and your sons' sons, and your flocks and your herds, and all which is yours.
And sustain you will I there, for there are still five years of famine, lest destitute you be becoming, and your sons' and all who are yours."'
 "And, behold, your eyes are seeing, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth which is speaking to you.
And tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that you see. And hasten and bring down my father hither."
And falling is he on the neck of his brother Benjamin and weeping on him. And Benjamin weeps on his neck.
And kissing is he all his brothers and is weeping on them. And afterward his brothers speak with him.
And a voice is heard in Pharaoh's house, saying, "Come have the brothers of Joseph." And good is it in the eyes of Pharaoh and in the eyes of his servants.
And saying is Pharaoh to Joseph, "Say to your brothers, "This do: Spur your brutes and go. Enter into the land of Canaan,
and take your father and your households and come to me. And give will I to you all the good of the land of Egypt. And eat shall you the fat of the land.
And you are instructed to do this: Take to you from the land of Egypt cars for your tots and for your wives, and carry your father and come.
And your eye must not commiserate you over your chattels, for the good of all the land of Egypt, yours is it."
And doing so are the sons of Israel. And giving to them is Joseph cars at the bidding of Pharaoh, the king, and he is giving them provisions for the way.
To every man of them he gives changes of garments, and to Benjamin he gives three hundred silverlings and five changes of garments.
And to his father he sends this: ten jack-asses bearing the good of the land of Egypt, and ten she-asses bearing cereals and bread and a sort for his father for the way.
And sending is he his brothers and they are going. And saying is he to them, "You must not be disturbed on the way."
And up are they going from Egypt and coming to the land of Canaan, to Jacob, their father.
And telling him are they, saying, "Still is your son, Joseph, living!" And that "he is ruling in all the land of Egypt!" Yet so torpid is Jacob's heart that he does not believe them.
And speaking are they to him all the words of Joseph which he spoke to them. Yet seeing is he the cars which Joseph had sent to carry him. Then living is the spirit of Jacob, their father.
And Israel is saying, "Much! Still is Joseph, my son, living! Go will I and see him ere I die."
And journeying is Israel, he, and all that he has. And coming is he to Beer-sheba and is sacrificing sacrifices to God of his father Isaac.
And speaking is God to Israel in appearances of the night, and saying, "Jacob! Jacob!" And saying is he, "Behold me!"
And saying is He, "I am the El, God of your forefather. You must not fear to go down to Egypt, for a great nation will I constitute you there.
I will go down with you to Egypt, and I, moreover, will bring, yea, bring you up. And Joseph shall set his hands on your eyes."
And rising is Jacob from Beer-sheba. And carrying are the sons of Israel Jacob, their father, and their tots and their wives, in the cars which Pharaoh sends to carry him.
And taking are they their cattle and all their goods which they had gotten in the land of Canaan, and coming to Egypt, Jacob and all his seed with him.
His sons and sons' sons with him, his daughters, and his sons' daughters, and all his seed brings he with him to Egypt.
And these are the names of the sons of Israel coming to Egypt: Jacob and his sons: The firstborn of Jacob, Reuben.
And the sons of Reuben: Enoch and Phallu and Hezron and Carmi.
And the sons of Simeon: Jemuel and Jamin and Ohad and Jachin and Zohar and Shaul, son of a Canaanitess.
And the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohas and Merari.
And the sons of Judah: Er and Onan and Shelah and Pharez and Zarah. Yet Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And there come to be sons of Pharez: Hezron and Hamul.
And the sons of Issachar: Tola and Phuvah and Jashub and Shimron.
And the sons of Zebulon: Sered and Elon and Jahleel.
These are the sons of Leah, which she bears for Jacob in Padan, Syria, and Dinah, his daughter. All the souls of his sons and his daughters are thirty-three.
And the sons of Gad: Ziphion and Haggi and Shuni and Ezbon, Eri and Arodi and Areli.
And the sons of Asher: Imnah and Ishuah and Ishui and Beriah; and Serah, their sister. And the sons of Beriah: Heber and Malchiel.
These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gives to his daughter Leah, and she bears these for Jacob sixteen souls.
The sons of Rachel, Jacob's wife: Joseph and Benjamin.
And sons are born to Joseph in the land of Egypt, whom Asenath, daughter of Potiphera, priest of On, bears for him, Manasseh and Ephraim. And the sons are born to Manasseh, whom a Syrian concubine bears for him, Machir. And Machir begets Galaad. And the sons of Ephraim, Manasseh's brother: Soutalaam and Taam. And the son of Soutalaam: Edem.
And the sons of Benjamin: Belah and Becher and Ashbel. And sons were born to Belah: Gera and Naaman, Ehi and Rosh, Muppim and Huppim and to Gera is born Ard.
These are the sons of Rachel, who were born to Jacob. All the souls are eighteen.
And the sons of Dan: Hushim.
And the sons of Naphtali: Jahzeel and Guni and Jezer and Shillem.
These are the sons of Bilhah, whom Laban gives to Rachel, his daughter. And she bears these for Jacob. All the souls are seven.
All the souls coming with Jacob to Egypt, which fare forth from his thighs, aside from the wives of Jacob's sons all the souls are sixty six.
And the sons of Joseph who are born to him in Egypt are two souls. All the souls pertaining to the house of Jacob coming to Egypt are seventy-five.
And Judah he sends before him to Joseph, to direct his face to Goshen. And coming are they to the land of Goshen.
And hitching up is Joseph his chariot and is going up to Goshen to meet Israel, his father, and is appearing to him. And falling is he on his neck. And weeping is he longer on his neck.
And saying is Israel to Joseph, "Die will I at once, after my seeing your face, for still living are you!"
And saying is Joseph to his brothers and to his father's household, "Up will I go and tell Pharaoh and say to him, `My brothers and my father's household, who were in the land of Canaan, have come to me.
And the mortals are graziers of flocks, for they became cattlemen, and their flocks and their herds and all that is theirs have they brought.'
 "And come shall it that Pharaoh will call you and say to you, `What is your occupation?'
Then say shall you, `Cattlemen are your servants from our youth till now, both we and our forefathers,' in order to dwell in the land of Goshen, for an abhorrence to Egyptians is every grazier of a flock."
And coming is Joseph and telling Pharaoh, and is saying to him, "My father and my brothers, and their flocks and their herds, and all that is theirs, come from the land of Canaan. And behold them in the land of Goshen."
And from the outstanding men of his brothers he takes with him five mortals, and putting them is he before Pharaoh.
And saying is Pharaoh to Joseph's brothers, "What is your occupation?" And saying are they to Pharaoh, "Graziers of flocks are your servants, both we and our forefathers."
And saying are they to Pharaoh, "To sojourn in the land have we come, for no pasture is there for the flocks which are your servants', for heavy is the famine in the land of Canaan. And now, pray, dwell will your servants in the land of Goshen."
And speaking is Pharaoh to Joseph, saying, "Your father and your brothers have come to you.
The land of Egypt, before you is it. In the best of the land cause your father and your brothers to dwell. Dwelling are they in the land of Goshen. And should you, forsooth, know able mortals among them, then place them as chiefs over the cattle which are mine."
And bringing is Joseph Jacob, his father, and is standing him before Pharaoh. And Jacob is blessing Pharaoh.
And saying is Pharaoh to Jacob, "How have been the days of the years of your life?"
And saying is Jacob to Pharaoh, "The days of the years of my life's sojourning are a hundred and thirty years. Few and evil come to be the days of the years of my life, and they do not overtake the days of the years of the life of my forefathers in the days of their sojournings."
And blessing is Jacob Pharaoh and is faring forth from before Pharaoh.
And Joseph located his father and his brothers, and is giving to them a freehold in the land of Egypt in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh instructs.
And sustaining is Joseph his father and his brothers and all his father's household. And there is bread for the mouths of the tots.
And bread there is none in all the land, for heavy is the famine exceedingly, and frantic is the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan in view of the famine.
And gleaning is Joseph all the money found in the land of Egypt and in the land of Canaan for the victuals which they are purchasing for their ration. And bringing is Joseph all the money to Pharaoh's house.
And spent is all the money in the land of Egypt and in the land of Canaan. And coming are all in Egypt to Joseph, saying, "Grant us bread! Why should we die in front of you? For the limit of our money has been reached."
And saying is Joseph, "Grant your cattle, and give it will I to you, bread for your cattle, if the money reaches its limit."
And bringing are they their cattle to Joseph, and giving is Joseph to them bread for horses, and for cattle of the flocks, and for cattle of the herds, and for asses. And sustaining them is he with bread, and fodder for all their cattle in that year.
And spent is that year. And coming are they to him in the second year, and saying to him, "Not suppress will we from my lord that spent is the money, and the cattle and the beasts belong to my lord, then nothing remains before my lord, barring our bodies and our ground.
Why shall we die before your eyes and our ground be desolate? Buy us and our ground with bread, and we and our ground will become servants of Pharaoh. And give seed for sowing and we shall live and not die, and the ground will not be desolate."
And buying is Joseph all the ground of Egypt for Pharaoh, for the Egyptians sell to Pharaoh each man his field, seeing that a fast hold has the famine over them. And coming is the land to be Pharaoh's.
And the people are made to serve him as servants from one end of Egypt's boundary unto its other end.
But the ground of the priests alone, this Joseph does not buy, for there is a statutory dole for the priests from Pharaoh, and they eat the statutory dole which Pharaoh gives to them. Therefore they did not sell their ground.
And saying is Joseph to all the Egyptians, "Behold! Buy do I you today, with your ground, for Pharaoh. Lo! for you there is seed, and sow shall you the ground.
And it comes, of the incomes, you give the fifth handful to Pharaoh, and four handfuls shall become yours, for seed for the field, and for your food, and for all who are in your household, and for food for your tots."
And saying are they, "Preserving are you our lives. Finding are we grace in the eyes of my lord, and we become Pharaoh's servants."
And Joseph is constituting it for a statute over the ground of Egypt till this day to Pharaoh a fifth. But the ground of the priests, theirs alone does not become Pharaoh's.
And dwelling is Israel in the land of Egypt, in the land of Goshen. And holdings have they in it and are fruitful, and increasing exceedingly.
And living is Jacob in the land of Egypt seventeen years. And coming are the days of the years of Jacob's life to be a hundred and forty-seven years.
And near are drawing the days of Israel's death, and he is calling his son Joseph and is saying to him, "Pray, should I find grace in your eyes, pray place your hand under my thigh and pray deal with me in kindness and truth. Pray, you must not entomb me in Egypt.
Lay me with my fathers, and carry me from Egypt and entomb me in their tomb." And saying is he, "I will do according to your word."
And saying is he, "Swear to me." And swearing is he to him. And worshiping is Israel on the head of his staff.
And coming is it after these things that someone is saying to Joseph, "Behold! Your father is ailing." And taking is he his two sons with him, Manasseh and Ephraim, and comes to Jacob.
And someone is telling Jacob and saying, "Behold! Your son Joseph is coming to you." And encouraging himself is Israel, and is sitting on the couch.
And saying is Jacob to Joseph, "The El-Who-Suffices appeared to me in Luz, in the land of Canaan, and blessing me is He,
and saying to me, `Behold Me making you fruitful. And I increase you, and give you to be an assembly of peoples. And I give this land to you and to your seed after you for a freehold eonian.'
 "And now your two sons, born to you in the land of Egypt previous to my coming to you to Egypt, mine are they, Ephraim and Manasseh. As Reuben and as Simeon, shall they become mine.
Yet your kindred, whom you beget after them, are yours. Come shall they to be called by the name of their brothers in allotting their allotment.
 "And I, at my coming from Padan, Syria, Rachel, your mother, died by me in the land of Canaan in the way, while still some distance overland to come to Ephrath. And I entombed her there on the way to Ephrath." (It is now Bethlehem.)
And seeing is Israel the sons of Joseph. And saying is he, "Who are these?"
And saying is Joseph to his father, "My sons are they, who were given me by God in this place." And saying is Jacob, "Take them, pray, to me and I will bless them."
Yet the eyes of Israel are heavy with age and he cannot see. And close is he bringing them to him. And kissing them is he and embracing them.
And saying to Joseph is Israel, "To see your face I did not pray, and behold! God, moreover, shows me your seed."
And forth is Joseph bringing them from between his knees, and is prostrating to him with his nostrils to the earth.
And taking is Joseph the two, Ephraim on his right at Israel's left, and Manasseh on his left at Israel's right, and is bringing them close to him.
And stretching out is Israel his right hand and is setting it on Ephraim's head, when he is the inferior in station, and his left on Manasseh's head, using his hands intelligently, for Manasseh is the firstborn.
And blessing them is he and saying, "God before Whom my forefathers, Abraham and Isaac, walked, God, my Shepherd from my youth till this day,
the Messenger, my Redeemer from all evil, bless these youths. And called on them shall be my name, and the name of my forefathers, Abraham and Isaac. And prolific shall they be, to make a vast increase within the land."
And seeing is Joseph that his father is setting his right hand on Ephraim's head, and evil is it in his eyes. And up is Joseph holding his father's hand, to take it away, off of Ephraim's head, on to Manasseh's head.
And saying is Joseph to his father, "Not so, my father, for this is the firstborn. Place your right on his head."
And refusing is his father and saying, "I know, my son! I know! Moreover, he shall become a people, and he shall become great. Howbeit, his smaller brother shall be greater than he. And his seed shall become a fullness of the nations.
And blessing them is he in that day, saying, "By you shall Israel bless, saying, "God make you as Ephraim and as Manasseh!'" And placing is he Ephraim before Manasseh.
And saying is Israel to Joseph, "Behold! I am dying. Yet God comes to be with you, and restores you to the land of your forefathers!
And I, behold! I give to you Shechem, one share over your brothers, of that which I took from the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow."
And calling is Jacob to his sons and saying, "Gather, and I will tell you what will meet you in the days hereafter.
Convene and hear, sons of Jacob, and hearken to Israel, your father.
Reuben, my firstborn, you are my vigor, and the beginning of my virility, with a surplus for bearing and a surplus of strength.
Ebullient as water, you must not have a surplus! For up you went to the bed of your father. Then you violated my berth to which you went up.
Simeon and Levi are brothers. They concluded violence out of their covenants.
Into their deliberation you must not come, my soul! And in their assembly you must not contend, my glory. For in their anger they killed men, and in their acceptance they felled a chief.
Cursed is their anger, for it was strong. And their rage, for it was obstinate. Apportion them will I in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.
Judah, you and your brothers will acclaim. Your hands shall be on the scruff of your enemies. Prostrate to you shall the sons of your father.
The whelp of a lion is Judah. From the prey, my son, bow will he, recline as a lion. And as a parent lion, who will make him rise?
Not withdraw shall the sceptre from Judah, nor a statue-maker's staff from between his feet, till it be that ease shall come to him. And to it shall the expectation of the people be.
Bind to a vine will he his colt, and to a yellow muscat grape the foal of his she-ass, he rinses in wine his apparel, and in the blood of grapes his coverlet.
Flushed will be his eyes from wine, and white, his teeth, from milk.
Zebulon at a port of the seas shall tabernacle, and at a port for ships with its flank unto Sidon.
Issachar covets pleasantness, recline will he between the hearthstones, and
see a resting place that is good, and a land that is pleasant, yet stretch out will he his shoulder for a burden, and become will he a servant under a labor levy.
Dan shall adjudicate his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.
Become shall Dan a serpent on a way, a horned snake on a path, that bites the heels of a horse, and fall shall its rider backward.
For Your salvation I expect, YHVH!
Gad a raiding party shall `raid' him, yet he shall raid their heels,
Asher stout shall be his bread, and he will provide royal luxuries.
Naphtali is a oak stretched out, the giver of products that are seemly.
A fruitful son is Joseph, a fruitful son, joy of my eye, my son, inferior, to me has returned,
and bitter were they with him, and contended and begrudging him were the archers,
yet broken in virility is their bow, and slack are the arms of their hands. From the hands of the Sturdy One of Jacob, thence is the Shepherd, the Stone of Israel,
from the El of your father, and your Helper, and He Who-Suffices, and your Blesser, blessings of the heavens from above, blessings of the submerged chaos reclining beneath, blessings of the breasts and the womb,
blessings of your father and your mother. Master are they over the blessings of my mountains, unto the yearning of the eonian hills, coming are they on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the governor of his brothers.
Benjamin is a wolf, tearing to pieces. In the morning he'll devour further, and in the evening he'll apportion the loot."
All these are the twelve tribes of Israel. And this is what their father speaks to them, when he is blessing them. Each man according to his blessing he blesses them.
And instructing them is he, and saying to them, "I am being gathered to my people. Entomb me with my forefathers in the cave which is in the field of Ephron, the Hittite,
in the double cave which is in the field adjoining Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field from Ephron, the Hittite, for a freehold for a tomb.
And there they entombed Isaac and Rebecca, his wife. "And there I entombed Leah.
Bought was the field and the cave which is in it from the sons of Heth."
And finishing is Jacob instructing his sons, and gathering is he his feet into the couch and is expiring, and is being gathered to his people.
And falling is Joseph on his father's face, and lamenting over him and kissing him.
And instructing is Joseph his servants, the healers, to embalm his father. And embalming are the healers Israel.
And fulfilling are they for him forty days, for so they fill the days of the embalmed. And lamenting are the Egyptians with him seventy days.
And passing are the days of his lamentation, and speaking is Joseph to the household of Pharaoh, saying, "Pray, should I find grace in your eyes, pray, speak for me in the ears of Pharaoh, saying, that
my father adjured me before his death saying, Behold! I am dying. In my tomb which I dug for myself in the land of Canaan, there shall you entomb me.' And now, pray, up will I go and entomb my father, as I swore, and return."
And saying is Pharaoh to Joseph, "Go up and entomb your father, as he adjured you."
And up is Joseph going to entomb his father. And up with him are going all the servants of Pharaoh, and the elders of his household, and all the elders of the land of Egypt,
and all Joseph's household, and his brothers, and all his father's household. But the tots and the flocks and their herds they leave behind in the land of Goshen.
And up with him go both chariots and horsemen. And it comes to be an exceedingly heavy camp.
And coming are they unto the threshing site of Atad, which is across the Jordan, and wailing there are they with an exceedingly great and heavy wailing. And making is he a mourning for his father seven days.
And seeing are the dwellers in the land, the Canaanites, the mourning on the threshing site of Atad, and saying are they, "A heavy mourning is this for the Egyptians. Therefore its name is called "Abel-Mizraim", which is across the Jordan.
And doing for him are his sons so as he instructs them.
And carrying him are his sons to the land of Canaan, and entombing him are they in the double cave of the field, the cave which Abraham bought with the field, for a freehold, for a tomb, from Ephron, the Hittite, adjoining Mamre.
And returning is Joseph to Egypt, he and his brothers and all those going up with him to entomb his father, after his father's entombment.
And seeing are Joseph's brothers that their father is dead, and saying are they, "What if Joseph is holding a grudge against us and is reversing, yea reversing to us all the evil with which we requited him?"
And instructions are they giving to Joseph, saying, "Your father gave instructions before his death, saying,
 `Thus are you saying to Joseph: Oh, bear, pray, with the transgression of your brothers and their sin, that with evil they requited you.' And now, pray, bear with the transgression of the servants of God of your father." And lamenting is Joseph as they speak to him.
And going are his brothers, moreover, and falling before him. And saying are they, "Behold us yours for servants."
And saying to them is Joseph, "You must not fear, for under God am I.
And you, you devised against me evil, yet God devises it for me for good, that it may work out as at this day, to preserve alive many people.
And now, you must not fear. I'll sustain you and your tots." And comforting them is he, and speaking to their hearts.
And dwelling is Joseph in Egypt, he and his brothers, and all his father's household. And living is Joseph a hundred and ten years.
And seeing is Joseph Ephraim's sons to the third generation. Moreover, the sons of Machir, the son of Manasseh, were born on Joseph's knees.
And saying is Joseph to his brothers, "I am dying. Yet visit, yea, visit will God you, and bring you up from this land to the land which God swore to our forefathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob."
And adjuring is Joseph the sons of Israel saying, "Visit, yea, visit you will God, and up shall you bring my bones with you."
And dying is Joseph, a hundred and ten years old. And embalming him are they, and placed is he in a coffer in Egypt.
These are the names of the sons of Israel coming to Egypt with Jacob; they came, each man with his household:
Reuben, Simeon, Levi and Judah,
Issachar, Zebulun and Benjamin,
Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher.
All the souls having come forth from the thigh of Jacob had become seventy souls. As for Joseph, he was in Egypt.
Then Joseph died and all his brothers, and all that generation.
And the sons of Israel were fruitful and were swarming and numerous and very, very staunch. So the land was filling up with them.
Then a new king rose over Egypt who knew nothing about Joseph.
He said to his people: Behold, the people of the sons of Israel are more numerous and staunch than we.
Grant attention! Let us show ourselves wise as to them, lest they increase and it come to be when someone proclaims war on us, and they are added, even they, to those hating us, that they fight against us and ascend from the land.
Hence they placed over them chiefs of labor conscriptions that they might humiliate them with their burdens. So they were building as bulwark cities for Pharaoh, Pithom and Raamses.
Yet just as they were humiliating them so they multiplied and so they breached forth. Hence the Egyptians were irritated in view of the sons of Israel.
So the Egyptians made the sons of Israel serve with rigor,
and they embittered their lives with hard service in clay and in bricks, and with all service in the field, in addition to all their service which they served among them with rigor.
Then the king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew midwives (of whom the name of the first one was Shiphrah, and the name of the second Puah)
and said: In your midwifery for the Hebrew women, when you see them on the bracing stones, if it is a son then you will put him to death, and if it is a daughter then she will live.
Yet the midwives feared the One, God, and they did not act just as the king of Egypt had spoken to them; and they kept the boys alive.
Then the king of Egypt called for the midwives and said to them: For what reason did you do this thing and keep the boys alive?
Now the midwives said to Pharaoh: The Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women, for they are livelier. Ere the midwife comes to them, they have already borne.
Hence God dealt well with the midwives; and the people multiplied and were very staunch.
So it came to be because the midwives feared the One, God, that He provided households for them.
Then Pharaoh instructed all his people, saying: Every son born to the Hebrews, into the waterway shall you fling him, yet every daughter you shall keep alive.
A man of the house of Levi went and took a daughter of Levi.
The woman became pregnant and bore a son, and she saw him that he was a goodly child; so she secluded him three months.
When she could no longer seclude him, then she took for him an ark of papyrus, daubed it with asphalt and with pitch and placed the boy in it; then she placed it in the weeds on the shore of the waterway.
Yet his sister stationed herself afar, to know what might be done to him.
Then Pharaoh's daughter descended to bathe at the waterway, while her maidens were going on the side of the waterway. When she saw the ark in the midst of the weeds she sent her maidservant and took it;
she opened it and saw him, the boy; and behold, the lad was lamenting. She spared him and said: This is one of the boys of the Hebrews.
Then his sister said to the daughter of Pharaoh: Shall I go and call for you a woman, a wetnurse from the Hebrews that she may nurse the boy for you?
And Pharaoh's daughter said to her: Go! So the damsel went and called the boy's mother.
Then Pharaoh's daughter said to her: Have this boy go, and nurse him for me, and I shall give you your hire. So the woman took the boy and nursed him.
When the boy was growing up she brought him to Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son. She called his name Moses and said: Because I have removed him from the water.
It came to be in those days when Moses had grown up that he went forth to his brothers and saw their burdens. He also saw an Egyptian man smiting a Hebrew man, one of his brothers.
He faced this way and that and saw that there was no one else; then he smote the Egyptian and buried him in the sand.
When he went forth on the second day, behold two men, Hebrews, were striving with each other. So he said to the wicked one: Why are you smiting your associate?
Yet he said: Who appointed you as foreman and judge over us? Are you meaning to kill me just as you killed the Egyptian? Then Moses became fearful and said: Surely the matter is known.
When Pharaoh heard of this matter, he sought to kill Moses. So Moses ran away from the face of Pharaoh and dwelt in the land of Midian, where he sat by the well.
Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters, and they came, drew out water and filled the troughs to let their father's flock drink.
But the shepherds came and drove them out; so Moses rose, saved them and let their flock drink.
When they came to Reuel, their father, he said: For what reason did you hasten to come in today?
They said: An Egyptian man rescued us from the hand of the shepherds, and, moreover, he drew, yea drew out water for us and let the flock drink.
Then he said to his daughters: And where is he? Why is this that you have forsaken the man? Call him that he may eat bread.
Hence Moses was disposed to dwell with the man. He gave Zipporah, his daughter, to Moses for a wife.
When she bore a son, he called his name Gershom, for he said: A sojourner have I become in a foreign land.
In the course of these many days it came to be that the king of Egypt died. Yet the sons of Israel sighed under the servitude and cried out, and their imploration ascended to the One, God, out of the servitude.
God heard their moaning, and God was mindful of His covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
God saw the sons of Israel and was realized by them.
As for Moses, he had become a shepherd of the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian. Once he was leading the flock behind the wilderness and came to the Mount of the One, God, to Horeb.
Then the messenger of YHVH appeared to him in a blaze of fire from the midst of a thornbush. So he stared, and behold, the thornbush was consuming with fire, yet the thornbush, it was not being devoured.
Hence Moses said: Let me withdraw, I pray, and discern this great sight, for what reason the thornbush is not being consumed.
When YHVH saw that he withdrew to discern, God called to him from the midst of the thornbush and said: Moses! Moses! So he answered: Behold me!
Then he said: Do not come near hither! Ease your sandals off your feet, for the place on which you are standing, this is ground of holiness.
And He said: I am God of your fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac and God of Jacob. Now Moses concealed his face, for he feared to look toward the One, God.
Then YHVH said: I see, yea see the humiliation of My people who are in Egypt. And I hear their crying because of the presence of their exactors; for I know their pains.
Hence I have descended to rescue them from the hand of Egypt and to bring them up from that land to a land good and wide, to a land gushing with milk and honey, to the place of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Girgashite, the Hivite and the Jebusite.
And now, behold, the cry of the sons of Israel has come to Me, and indeed, I have seen the oppression with which Egypt has been oppressing them.
Now go, I am sending you to Pharaoh. Bring forth My People, the sons of Israel, from Egypt.
Yet Moses said to the One, God: Who am I that I should go to Pharaoh and that I should bring forth the sons of Israel from Egypt?
Then He said: I shall come to be with you. And this will be the sign for you that I have sent you: when you bring the people forth from Egypt you shall serve the One, God, on this mountain.
Now Moses said to the One, God: Behold! When I am coming to the sons of Israel, and I say to them, God of your fathers sends me to you, then they will say to me, What about His name? What shall I say to them?
Then God spoke to Moses: I shall come to be just as I am coming to be. And He said: Thus shall you say to the sons of Israel, I-Shall-Come-to-Be has sent me to you.
And God said further to Moses: Thus shall you say to the sons of Israel, YHVH, God of your fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac and God of Jacob, has sent me to you. This is My name for the eon, and this the remembrance of Me for generation after generation.
Go, and you will gather the elders of the sons of Israel and say to them, YHVH, God of your fathers, appeared to me, God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, saying, I have noticed, yea noticed you and what is being done to you in Egypt.
Hence I am saying that I shall bring you up from the humiliation of Egypt to the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Girgashite, the Hivite and the Jebusite, to a land gushing with milk and honey.
Then they will hearken to your voice, and you will enter, you and the elders of Israel, to the king of Egypt and say to him: YHVH, God of the Hebrews, has met with us. So now, we pray, let us go a way of three days into the wilderness that we may sacrifice to YHVH our God.
Yet I know that the king of Egypt shall not give you leave to go yea not even by a steadfast hand.
Hence I will put forth My hand and smite Egypt with all My marvels which I shall do within it, and afterward he shall dismiss you.
And I will give this people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians. It will come to be that when you are going you shall not go empty-handed,
for each woman will ask of her neighbour, and of her who sojourns in her house, for articles of silver and articles of gold and garments. And you will place them on your sons and on your daughters, and you will despoil the Egyptians.
Then Moses answered and said: Yet behold, they shall not believe me, nor shall they hearken to my voice, for they shall say, YHVH has not appeared to you.
Now YHVH said to him: What is this in your hand? And he answered: A rod.
Then He said: Fling it to the earth. So he flung it to the earth, and it became a serpent. And Moses fled from its presence.
Then YHVH said to Moses: Put forth your hand and take hold of its tail (so he put forth his hand and held fast to it, and it became a rod in his palm)
that they may believe that YHVH, God of their fathers, appeared to you, God of Abraham, God of Isaac and God of Jacob.
And YHVH said to him further: Now bring your hand into your bosom. So he brought his hand into his bosom and brought it forth from his bosom, and behold, his hand was leprous as snow.
Then He said: Restore your hand to your bosom. So he restored his hand to his bosom and brought it forth from his bosom, and, behold, it was restored as his other flesh.
Hence it will come to be should they not believe you nor hearken to the voice of the first sign, they may believe the voice of the latter sign.
Yet it will come to be even should they not believe these two signs, nor hearken to your voice, then you will take some of the water of the waterway and pour it out on the dry land. And the waters which you are taking from the waterway will come to be, yea will come to be blood on the dry land.
Then Moses said to YHVH: O, my Lord! I am no man of words even from yesterday, even from three days ago, even since You spoke to Your servant, for I am heavy of mouth and heavy of tongue.
YHVH said to him: Who make the mouth for a human or Who is making one mute or deaf or with eye unclosed or blind? Is it not I, YHVH?
And now go, and I shall come to be with your mouth and direct you what you shall speak.
Yet he said: O, my Lord! Send, I pray, by the hand of whomsoever You should send.
Then the anger of YHVH grew hot against Moses. And He said: Is there not Aaron, the Levite, your brother? I know that he can speak, yea speak. And, moreover, behold, he is coming forth to meet you, and he will see you and rejoice in his heart.
You will speak to him and place the words in his mouth. And I shall come to be with your mouth and with his mouth and direct both of you as to what you shall do.
So he will speak for you to the people; it will come to be that he shall become a mouth for you, and you shall become an God for him.
And this rod shall you take in your hand with which you shall do the signs.
Then Moses went and returned to Jethro, his father-in-law, and said to him: Let me go, I pray, and return to my brothers who are in Egypt, and let me see whether they are still alive. And Jethro said to Moses: Go in peace.
Then YHVH said to Moses in Midian: Go! Return to Egypt, for all the men who were seeking your soul have died.
So Moses took his wife and his sons and let them ride on the donkey and returned to the land of Egypt. Moses also took the rod of the One, God, in his hand.
And YHVH said to Moses: When you go to return to Egypt, see to all the miracles which I place in your hand, that you do them before Pharaoh. Yet I shall make his heart steadfast, and he shall not dismiss the people.
So you will say to Pharaoh: Thus says YHVH, My son, My firstborn, is Israel.
And I am saying to you: Dismiss My son that he may serve Me, yet should you refuse to dismiss him, behold, I shall be killing your son, your firstborn.
It came to be on the way, in the lodging, that a messenger of YHVH encountered him and sought to put him to death.
So Zipporah took a chert knife and cut off the foreskin of her son and touched it to his feet and said: Because one of bloody affinity are you to me.
And he slacked off from him. Then it was that she said, blood affinity, referring to circumcisions.
YHVH said to Aaron: Go to the wilderness to meet Moses. So he went and encountered him at the mount of God, and kissed him.
Now Moses told to Aaron all the words of YHVH with which He had sent him, and all the signs with which He had instructed him.
Then Moses and Aaron went and gathered all the elders of the sons of Israel.
Aaron spoke all the words which YHVH had spoken to Moses, and he did the signs before the eyes of the people.
Hence the people believed; when they heard that YHVH notices the sons of Israel and that He sees their humiliation, then they bowed their heads and bowed themselves down.
Afterward Moses and Aaron entered and said to Pharaoh: Thus says YHVH God of Israel, Dismiss My people that they may celebrate to Me in the wilderness.
Yet Pharaoh said: Who is YHVH to Whose voice I should hearken to dismiss Israel? I do not know YHVH! And, moreover, Israel I shall not dismiss.
Then they said: God of the Hebrews has met with us. Let us go, we pray, a way of three days into the wilderness, and let us sacrifice to YHVH our God, lest He come upon us with the plague or with the sword.
Yet the king of Egypt said to them: Why, Moses and Aaron, are you causing the people to renounce their tasks? Go to your burdens!
And Pharaoh said: Behold, they are now more numerous than the people of the land, and you cause them to cease from their burdens.
Hence Pharaoh instructed on that day the exactors among the people and their superintendents, saying:
You shall not continue to give crushed straw to the people to mold the bricks as heretofore. They shall go and rake together crushed straw for themselves.
You shall place on them the regular number of bricks which they were making heretofore. You shall not diminish from it, for they are slackers. Therefore they are crying, saying: Let us go; let us sacrifice to our God.
The service shall be heavy on the men, and they shall make do with it and not heed false words.
So the exactors of the people and their superintendents went forth and spoke to the people, saying: Thus says Pharaoh: I am not giving crushed straw to you.
As for you, go, take for yourselves crushed straw from whatever you may find, because there shall be nothing subtracted from your service.
Hence the people scattered in all the land of Egypt to rake together straw for crushed straw.
And the exactors were rushing, saying: Finish your tasks, a day's tally in its day, just as when there was crushed straw given to you.
Then the superintendents of the sons of Israel were being smitten, whom Pharaoh's exactors had placed over them, saying: For what reason did you not finish your statutory number of bricks both yesterday and today as you did heretofore?
Then the superintendents of the sons of Israel entered and cried to Pharaoh, saying: Why are you doing thus to your servants?
Crushed straw is not being given to your servants. And of bricks, they are saying to us, Make them. And behold, your servants are being smitten, and your people are at fault.
Yet he said: You are slackers slackers! Therefore you are saying, Let us go; let us sacrifice to YHVH.
Yet now go, serve! But crushed straw shall not be given to you, though the regular number of bricks shall you provide.
Hence the superintendents of the sons of Israel saw themselves in an evil plight, having to say: You shall not subtract from your bricks a day's tally in its day.
So they came upon Moses and Aaron, stationed to meet them when they came forth from Pharaoh.
They said to them: May YHVH see you, and may He judge since you have caused our scent to stink in the eyes of Pharaoh and in the eyes of his servants, giving a sword into their hands to kill us.
Moses returned to YHVH and said: YHVH, why have You done evil to this people? And why is this that You have sent me?
For since I entered to Pharaoh to speak in Your name, he has done evil to this people. Yet you have not rescued, yea rescued Your people.
Then YHVH said to Moses: Now you shall see what I will do to Pharaoh, for under a steadfast hand he shall dismiss them, and under a steadfast hand he shall drive them out from his land.
God spoke to Moses and said to him: I am YHVH,
and I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob as the El-Who-Suffices; as to My name YHVH, I was not fully realized by them.
However, I set up My covenant with them to give to them the land of Canaan, the land of their sojournings, in which they had sojourned.
Moreover, I Myself have hearkened to the moaning of the sons of Israel whom the Egyptians are making servants. And I am mindful of My covenant.
Wherefore say to the sons of Israel: I am YHVH; hence I will bring you forth from beneath the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rescue you from their service. I will redeem you with an outstretched arm and with great judgments.
I will take you to Me as a people. I will become to you as God, and you will realize that I am YHVH your God, Who brought you forth from beneath the burdens of the Egyptians.
I will bring you to the land which I lifted up My hand in swearing to give it to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob. I will give it to you as a tenancy. I am YHVH.
When Moses spoke thus to the sons of Israel, they did not hearken to Moses because of shortness of spirit and hard service.
Then YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Enter, speak to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, that he may dismiss the sons of Israel from his land.
Yet Moses spoke before YHVH, saying: Behold, the sons of Israel do not hearken to me. How shall Pharaoh hearken to me when I am uncircumcised of lip?
Then YHVH spoke to Moses and to Aaron and instructed them as to the sons of Israel and as to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to bring forth the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt.
These are the heads of their fathers' house: The sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel, are Hanoch and Pallu, Hezron and Carmi; these are the families of Reuben.
The sons of Simeon are Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zohar and Shaul, the son of the Canaanitess; these are the families of Simeon.
These are the names of the sons of Levi according to their genealogical annals: Gershon, Kohath and Merari. And the years of the life of Levi were a hundred thirty-seven years.
The sons of Gershon are Libni and Shimei, according to their families.
The sons of Kohath are Amram, Izhar, Hebron and Uzziel. And the years of the life of Kohath were a hundred thirty-three years.
The sons of Merari are Mahli and Mushi. These are the Levite families according to their genealogical annals.
Amram took Jochebed, his aunt, as his wife; and she bore for him Aaron, Moses and Miriam, their sister. And the years of the life of Amram were a hundred thirty-seven years.
The sons of Izhar are Korah, Nepheg and Zichri.
The sons of Uzziel are Mishael, Elzaphan and Sithri.
Aaron took Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab and sister of Nahshon, as his wife; and she bore for him Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
The sons of Korah are Assir, Elkanah and Abiasaph. These are the Korahite families.
Eleazar, son of Aaron, took to himself one from the daughters of Putiel as his wife; and she bore for him Phinehas. These are the heads of the fathers of the Levites according to their families.
This Aaron and this Moses are those to whom YHVH said: Bring forth the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt, according to their hosts.
They were the speakers to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to bring forth the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt, this Moses and this Aaron.
It came to be on the day when YHVH spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt,
that YHVH spoke to Moses, saying: I am YHVH. Speak to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, all that I am speaking to you.
Yet Moses said before YHVH: Behold, I am uncircumcised of lip, so how shall Pharaoh hearken to me?
YHVH said to Moses: See, I appoint you as God to Pharaoh; and Aaron, your brother, shall come to be your prophet.
You yourself shall speak all that I am instructing you while Aaron, your brother, shall speak to Pharaoh that he dismiss the sons of Israel from his land.
And I Myself shall harden the heart of Pharaoh and increase My signs and My miracles in the land of Egypt.
Though Pharaoh shall not hearken to you, yet I will lay My hand on Egypt and bring forth My hosts, My people, the sons of Israel, from the land of Egypt with great judgments.
And all the Egyptians will know that I am YHVH when I stretch out My hand over Egypt and bring forth the sons of Israel from their midst.
So Moses and Aaron did just as YHVH instructed them; thus they did.
Now Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron was eighty-three years old when they spoke to Pharaoh.
YHVH spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying:
When Pharaoh is speaking to you, saying, Give your sign or miracle, then you will say to Aaron, Take your rod and fling it before Pharaoh that it may become a snake.
Moses and Aaron entered to Pharaoh and did so, just as YHVH had instructed. Aaron flung his rod before Pharaoh and before his servants, and it became a snake.
Pharaoh, however, called for the wise men and for the enchanters. And even they, the sacred scribes of Egypt, did so with their occultisms.
Each man flung his rod, and they became snakes. Then Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.
Yet the heart of Pharaoh was steadfast, and he did not hearken to them, just as YHVH had spoken.
Then YHVH said to Moses: Gloried is the heart of Pharaoh; he has refused to dismiss the people.
Go to Pharaoh in the morning. Behold, he shall be going forth to the waters, so you will station yourself to meet him on the shore of the waterway. And the rod which was turned into a serpent shall you take in your hand.
Then you will say to him: YHVH, God of the Hebrews, sent me to you, saying, Dismiss My people that they may serve Me in the wilderness. And behold, you have not hearkened meanwhile.
Thus says YHVH: By this shall you know that I am YHVH. Behold, I shall be smiting with the rod which is in my hand upon the waters which are in the waterway, and they will be turned to blood,
and the fish which are in the waterway shall die, and the waterway will stink, and the Egyptians will be too repelled to drink the waters from the waterway.
Then YHVH said to Moses: Say to Aaron, Take your rod, and stretch out your hand over the waters of Egypt, over their streams, over their waterways, over their ponds and over every confluence of their waters that they may become blood. Thus there will come to be blood in all the land of Egypt and in wooden and in stone troughs.
Moses and Aaron did so just as YHVH had instructed; he raised the rod and smote the waters which were in the waterway before the eyes of Pharaoh and before the eyes of his servants. And all the waters which were in the waterway were turned to blood.
The fish which were in the waterway died, and the waterway stank so that the Egyptians were unable to drink the waters from the waterway. And the blood came to be in all the land of Egypt.
Also the sacred scribes of Egypt did so with their occultisms; hence the heart of Pharaoh was steadfast, and he did not hearken to them, just as YHVH had spoken.
Pharaoh turned around, entered into his house and did not set his heart even to this.
Yet all the Egyptians delved round about the waterway for waters to drink, for they were unable to drink from the waters of the waterway.
When seven days were fulfilled after YHVH's smiting the waterway,
then YHVH said to Moses: Enter to Pharaoh, and say to him, Thus says YHVH: Dismiss My people that they may serve Me!
And if you refuse to dismiss them, behold, I will be striking all your boundary with frogs.
The waterway will swarm with frogs, and they will ascend and enter into your house and your bed chamber and onto your couch, into the house of your servants and on your people, into your stoves and into your kneading-troughs.
On you and on your people and on all your servants shall the frogs ascend.
Then YHVH said to Moses: Say to Aaron, Stretch out your hand with your rod over the streams, over the waterways and over the ponds, and bring up the frogs on the land of Egypt.
Now Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt. And the frogs ascended and covered the land of Egypt.
Also the sacred scribes did so with their occultisms, and they brought up frogs over the land of Egypt.
Then Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron and said: Make an entreaty to YHVH that He may take away the frogs from me and from my people; then I shall dismiss the people that they may sacrifice to YHVH.
Moses said to Pharaoh: Vaunt yourself over me as to when I should make entreaty for you and for your servants and for your people to cut off the frogs from you and from your houses. But in the waterway shall they remain.
So he said: Tomorrow. And he said: Be it according to your word, that you may know that there is no one as YHVH our God.
The frogs will withdraw from you and from your houses, from your servants and from your people. But in the waterway shall they remain.
Then Moses and Aaron went forth from Pharaoh, and Moses cried to YHVH concerning the matter of the frogs which He had appointed for Pharaoh.
So YHVH did according to the word of Moses, and the frogs died from the houses, from the hamlets and from the fields.
They piled them up, homer after homer, and the land stank.
When Pharaoh saw that there came to be an interval, he caused his heart to glory, and he hearkened not to them, just as YHVH had spoken.
Then YHVH said to Moses: Say to Aaron, Stretch out your hand with your rod and smite the soil of the land, and there will come to be lice in all the land of Egypt.
And they did so; Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod and smote the soil of the land: and there came to be lice on human and on beast. All the soil of the land came to be lice in all the land of Egypt.
Now the sacred scribes did so by their occultisms so as to bring forth the lice, yet they were unable. Since there had come to be lice on human and on beast.
The sacred scribes said to Pharaoh: This is the finger of God! Yet the heart of Pharaoh was steadfast, and he did not hearken to them just as YHVH had spoken.
Then YHVH said to Moses: Rise early in the morning and station yourself before Pharaoh. Behold, he will be going forth to the waters. Then you will say to him: Thus says YHVH, Dismiss My people that they may serve Me.
For should you not dismiss My people, behold Me sending on you, on your servants, on your people and on your houses a mixture of flies. The houses of Egypt will be full with the mixture of flies, and even the ground on which they are.
Yet I will distinguish, in that day, the land of Goshen on which My people are standing, that by no means there come to be there a mixture of flies so that you may know that I am YHVH within the land.
And I will place a distinction between My people and your people. Tomorrow shall this sign come to be.
And YHVH did so. A heavy mixture of flies came into the house of Pharaoh and the house of his servants and into all the land of Egypt. The land was ruined because of the presence of the mixture of flies.
Then Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron and said: Go! Sacrifice to your God in the land.
Yet Moses said: It is not the established custom to do so, for we shall sacrifice that which is an abhorrence of the Egyptians to YHVH our God. Behold, should we sacrifice an abhorrence of the Egyptians before their eyes, would they not stone us?
A way of three days shall we go into the wilderness and sacrifice to YHVH our God, just as He said to us.
So Pharaoh said: I shall dismiss you, that you may sacrifice to YHVH your God in the wilderness, but you shall not fare far, not far to go. Make an entreaty about me.
And Moses said: Behold, I am going forth from you, and I will make an entreaty to YHVH that the mixture of flies withdraw from Pharaoh, from his servants and from his people tomorrow. But Pharaoh must not continue to trifle in not dismissing the people to sacrifice to YHVH.
Then Moses went forth from Pharaoh, and he entreated YHVH.
And YHVH did according to the word of Moses; and the mixture of flies withdrew from Pharaoh, from his servants and from his people. Not one remained.
Yet Pharaoh gloried in his heart, even at this time, and he did not dismiss the people.
Then YHVH said to Moses: Enter to Pharaoh, and speak to him, Thus says YHVH, God of the Hebrews: Dismiss My people that they may serve Me.
For if you refuse to dismiss them, and you still are holding fast to them,
behold, the hand of YHVH is coming to be on your cattle which are in the field, on the horses, on the donkeys, on the camels, on the herd and on the flock, with an exceedingly heavy plague.
Yet YHVH will distinguish between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt; not a thing shall die of all belonging to the sons of Israel.
So YHVH made an appointment, saying: Tomorrow YHVH shall do this thing in the land.
And YHVH did this thing on the morrow. All the cattle of the Egyptians died, yet of the cattle of the sons of Israel not one died.
Then Pharaoh sent, and behold, not even one had died from the cattle of Israel. Yet the heart of Pharaoh gloried, and he did not dismiss the people.
YHVH said to Moses and to Aaron: Take for yourselves both of your hands full of limekiln quicklime, and Moses will sprinkle it toward the heavens, before the eyes of Pharaoh,
and it will become powder over all the land of Egypt. Then there will come to be on human and on beast, boils, budding out into pustules, in all the land of Egypt.
So they took the limekiln quicklime and stood before Pharaoh. And Moses sprinkled it toward the heavens, and there came to be boils, budding out into pustules on human and on beast.
Now the sacred scribes were unable to stand before Moses in view of the boils, for the boil came to be on the sacred scribes and on all Egypt.
Yet YHVH made the heart of Pharaoh steadfast, so that he did not hearken to them just as YHVH had spoken to Moses.
Then YHVH said to Moses: Rise early in the morning, station yourself before Pharaoh, and say to him, Thus says YHVH, God of the Hebrews: Dismiss My people that they may serve Me.
For at this time I am sending all My strokes onto your heart and your servants and your people in order that you shall know that there is no one such as Me in the entire earth.
For by now I could have put forth My hand and smitten you and your people with the plague so that you were suppressed from the land.
Howbeit, for this sake I keep you standing, in order to make you see My vigor, and that My name may be related in the entire earth.
Still you are heaping yourself up against My people so as not to dismiss them.
Behold Me causing it to rain about this time tomorrow an exceedingly heavy hail such as has not come in Egypt from the day of her founding until now.
And now send, bring your cattle under strong shelter and all that you have in the field. Every human and beast which is found in the field and is not gathered toward the house, on them the hail will descend, and they shall die.
The one fearful of the word of YHVH among the servants of Pharaoh made his servants and his cattle flee to the houses.
Yet he who was not setting his heart on the word of YHVH, forsook his servants and his cattle in the field.
YHVH said to Moses: Stretch out your hand to the heavens that hail may come to be in all the land of Egypt, on human and on beast and on all herbage of the field in the land of Egypt.
So Moses stretched out his rod to the heavens, and YHVH, He gave thundering sounds and hail, and fire ran earthward. Thus YHVH rained hail over the land of Egypt.
And the hail came with fire taking hold of itself in the midst of the hail, exceedingly heavy, such as had not come in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.
Now the hail smote in all the land of Egypt all that was in the field, from human unto beast. Also the hail smote all herbage of the field and broke every tree of the field.
But in the land of Goshen, where the sons of Israel were, no hail came.
Then Pharaoh sent and called for Moses and for Aaron and said to them: I have sinned this time. YHVH is the righteous One, and I and my people are the wicked.
Make an entreaty to YHVH, for this is enough of there coming to be thundering sounds of God and hail. Let me dismiss you; you shall not continue to stay.
Moses said to him: As I go forth from the city I shall spread my palms to YHVH, and the thundering sounds shall halt, and the hail shall come no longer, so that you may know that the earth is YHVH's.
As for you and your servants, I know that you are not yet fearing because of the presence of YHVH God.
(And the flax and the barley were smitten, for the barley was pollinated, and the flax was in pod;
yet the wheat and the spelt were not smitten, for they were in blade.)
When Moses went from Pharaoh from the city, and he spread his palms to YHVH, then the thundering sounds halted, and the hail and the rain was not poured forth earthward.
Now Pharaoh saw that the rain, the hail and the thundering sounds had halted, yet he continued to sin and made his heart glory, he and his servants.
So the heart of Pharaoh was steadfast, and he did not dismiss the sons of Israel, just as YHVH had spoken by means of Moses.
YHVH said to Moses: Enter to Pharaoh, for I have made his heart glory and the hearts of his servants that I may set these My signs among them,
and that you may relate in the ears of your son, and your son's son, that which I set in action in Egypt, and My signs which I placed among them, that you will know that I am YHVH.
So Moses and Aaron entered to Pharaoh and said to him: Thus says YHVH, God of the Hebrews, How long will you refuse to be humbled because of My presence? Dismiss My people that they may serve Me!
For if you refuse to dismiss My people, behold Me bringing the locusts swarm tomorrow into your boundary,
and it will cover the eye of the land, so that none can see the land, and it will eat the delivered leavings, whatever remained for you from the hail. It will eat every tree which is sprouting for you from the field.
Your houses will be full and the houses of all your servants and the houses of all the Egyptians, such as your fathers and your fathers' fathers had not seen, from the day they came to be on the ground until this day. Then he turned around and went forth from Pharaoh.
Now the servants of Pharaoh said to him: How long shall this man become a trap to us? Dismiss the men that they may serve YHVH their God. Do you not yet know that Egypt perishes?
When Moses and Aaron were brought back to Pharaoh, he said to them: Go! Serve YHVH your God! Who and who are those going?
Moses said: With our youths and with our elders shall we go, with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds shall we go, for it is a celebration of YHVH for us.
Then he said to them: So let YHVH be with you, if ever I dismiss you and your little ones! Discern that evil is in front of your faces.
Not so! Go now, just the men of mastery, and serve YHVH, for it is what you are seeking. So they drove them out from the presence of Pharaoh.
YHVH said to Moses: Stretch out your hand over the land of Egypt for the locust that it may ascend over the land of Egypt and devour all the herbage of the land and all the fruit of the trees which the hail has let remain.
So Moses stretched out his rod over the land of Egypt, and YHVH drove an east wind into the land all that day and all the night. The morning came, and the east wind carried the locust swarm along.
Then the locust swarm ascended over all the land of Egypt, and it rested within the entire boundary of Egypt, exceedingly heavy. Before it there had not come to be a locust swarm so great as it, and after it none shall come to be so.
It covered the eye of all the land, and the land was darkened. And it devoured all the herbage of the land and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left, so that no green at all was left on the trees nor on the herbage of the field in all the land of Egypt.
Now Pharaoh hastened to call for Moses and for Aaron and said: I have sinned against YHVH your God and against you.
And now, I pray, bear with my sin only this time, and make an entreaty to YHVH your God that he may take away from over me but this death!
So Moses went forth from Pharaoh and entreated YHVH.
Then YHVH turned an exceedingly steadfast sea wind, and it carried away the locust swarm and blew it toward the Sea of Weeds. Not one locust remained within the entire boundary of Egypt.
Yet YHVH made the heart of Pharaoh steadfast, so that he did not dismiss the sons of Israel.
YHVH said to Moses: Stretch out your hand to the heavens, and let a darkness come on the land of Egypt so that the darkness may cause them to grope.
Then Moses stretched out his hand to the heavens, and gloomy darkness came to be in all the land of Egypt for three days.
No one saw his brother, and no one rose from the place beneath him for three days. Yet all the sons of Israel came to have light in their dwellings.
Now Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron and said: Go! Serve YHVH your God, but your flocks and your herds shall be made to stay put. However your little ones may go with you.
Moses said: You, moreover, should give sacrifices and ascent offerings into our hand, that we may make them to YHVH our God.
And even our cattle shall go with us. Not a hoof shall remain, for from them shall we take to serve YHVH our God, for we do not know what we shall serve YHVH until we come there.
Yet YHVH made the heart of Pharaoh steadfast, and he did not comply so as to dismiss them.
So Pharaoh said to him: Go away from me! Guard yourself! Do not continue to see my face, for in the day you see my face you shall die!
Hence Moses said: Properly you have spoken! No further shall I continue to see your face!
YHVH said to Moses: One further contagion shall I bring on Pharaoh and on Egypt; afterward he shall dismiss you hence. When he finally dismisses you, he shall drive out, yea drive you out hence.
Oh speak in the ears of the people that they should ask, each man from his associate and each woman from her associate, articles of silver and articles of gold and raiment.
And YHVH gave the people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians, when they requested of them. Moreover, the man Moses was very great in the eyes of the Egyptians, in the eyes of the servants of Pharaoh and in the eyes of the people.
Then Moses said: Thus YHVH has spoken, About midnight I am going forth in the midst of Egypt.
And every firstborn in the land of Egypt will die, from the firstborn of Pharaoh, sitting on his throne, unto the firstborn of the maid who is behind the millstones and every firstborn of beast.
There will come to be a great cry in all the land of Egypt, such as it has not occurred, and such as it shall not occur again.
Yet against any of the sons of Israel, not a cur shall point his tongue against a man or even a beast, so that you may know that YHVH is distinguishing between Egypt and Israel.
Then all these, your servants, will descend to me and bow themselves down to me, saying: Go forth, you and all the people who follow in your footsteps! And afterward I shall go forth. So he went forth from Pharaoh in the heat of anger.
YHVH said to Moses: Pharaoh shall not hearken to you so that My miracles may increase in the land of Egypt.
Hence Moses and Aaron did all these miracles before Pharaoh. And YHVH made the heart of Pharaoh steadfast, so that he did not dismiss the sons of Israel from his land.
YHVH spoke to Moses and to Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying:
This month shall be for you the beginning of months. It shall be the first for you of the months of the year.
Speak to the whole congregation of the sons of Israel, saying: On the eighth of this month they shall take for themselves, each man a flockling according to the their fathers' house, a flockling for each household.
If the household be too few for what comes from a flockling, then he and his neighbor next to his house will take it according to the assessment of the souls. Each one corresponding to his eating shall you assess with the flockling.
A flawless flockling, a year old male, shall you come to have. From the he-lambs or from the goats shall you take it.
And it will become a charge of yours until the fourteenth day of this month. They will slay it, every assembly of the congregation of the sons of Israel, between the evening hours.
They will take some of the blood and put it on the two jambs and on the lintel, on the houses in which they are eating it.
Then they will eat the flesh on this night, roasted with fire, and with unleavened cakes; over bitter herbs shall they eat it.
Do not eat any of it underdone or cooked by being cooked in water, but rather roasted with fire, even its head along with its shanks and with its inwards.
You shall not reserve any of it until the morning. And what is left of it until the morning you shall burn with fire.
And thus shall you eat it, with your waist girded, your sandals on your feet and your stick in your hand. You will eat it in nervous haste. It is the passover to YHVH.
For I will pass through the land of Egypt in this night and smite every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from human even unto beast, and on all God of Egypt I shall execute judgments; I am YHVH.
Then the blood will become a sign for you on the houses where you are. When I see the blood I will pass over you. And there shall not come to be a stroke on you to cause ruin when I smite in the land of Egypt.
Hence this day will become for you a memorial day, and you will celebrate it as a celebration to YHVH. Throughout your generations shall you celebrate it as an eonian statute.
Seven days shall you eat unleavened cakes. Yea, on the first day you shall eradicate yeast from your houses; for if anyone is eating what is leavened, from the first day unto the seventh day, then that soul will be cut off from Israel.
On the first day you shall come to have a holy meeting, also on the seventh day a holy meeting. No work at all shall be done on them; only what is eaten by every soul, that alone may be prepared by you.
You will observe the instruction, for on this very day I will bring forth your hosts from the land of Egypt. And you will observe this day throughout your generations as an eonian statute.
In the first month on the fourteenth day of the month, in the evening, you shall eat unleavened cakes until the twenty-first day of the month, in the evening.
For seven days yeast shall not be found in your houses, for anyone eating leavened cakes, that soul will be cut off from the congregation of Israel, both among the sojourners and among the natives of the land.
You shall not eat any leavened cakes in all your dwellings; you shall eat unleavened cakes.
Moses called for all the elders of Israel and said to them: Draw out and take for yourselves from the flock for your families, and slay the passover.
Then you will take a bunch of hyssop, dip it in the blood which is in the basin and touch the lintel and the two jambs with the blood which is in the basin. As for you, not one of you shall go forth from the portal of his house until the morning.
When YHVH passes through to strike the Egyptians and sees the blood on the lintel and on the two jambs then YHVH will pass over the portal and shall not allow the ruiner to enter into your houses to strike.
Now you will observe this word as a statute for you and for your sons unto the eon.
It will come to be when you are entering to the land which YHVH is giving to you just as He spoke, then you will observe this service.
And it will come to be when your sons are saying to you: What is this service to you?
Then you will say: It is the sacrifice of passover to YHVH, Who passed over the houses of the sons of Israel in Egypt, when He struck the Egyptians, yet our households He rescued. So the people bowed their heads and bowed themselves down.
Then the sons of Israel went and did so; just as YHVH had instructed Moses and Aaron, thus they did.
It came to be at midnight that YHVH, He smote every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh, sitting on his throne, unto the firstborn of the captive who was in the house of the cistern, and every firstborn of beast.
When Pharaoh rose by night, he and all his servants and all the Egyptians, then there came to be a great cry in all the land of Egypt, for there was no house where there was no one dead.
Hence Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron by night and said: Rise! Go forth from the midst of my people, you indeed and the sons of Israel! Go, serve YHVH as you spoke.
Moreover, your flocks, even your herds, take just as you have spoken, and go! However you will bless me.
Also the Egyptians were steadfast over the people to hasten to dismiss them from the land, for they said: All of us are dying.
And the people carried their dough ere it was leavened, their kneading-troughs bundled in their garments on their backs.
Then the sons of Israel did according to the word of Moses and requested from the Egyptians articles of silver and articles of gold, and garments.
And YHVH, He gave the people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians, when they requested them; thus they despoiled the Egyptians.
The sons of Israel journeyed from Rameses toward Succoth, about six hundred thousand men on foot, those of mastery, besides the little ones.
Moreover a mixed multitude ascended with them, and flocks, herds and cattle, exceedingly heavy.
They baked the dough which they brought forth from Egypt, unleavened ember cakes, for it was not leavened, for they were driven out of Egypt and they could not dally, and, moreover, they did not make provision for themselves.
Now the dwelling of the sons of Israel and their fathers who dwelt in the land of Canaan and in the land of Egypt was four hundred thirty years.
And it came to be at the end of four hundred thirty years and it came to be on this very day that all the host of YHVH went forth from the land of Egypt.
It is a night of observances for YHVH to bring them forth from the land of Egypt. This same night is to YHVH, observances for all the sons of Israel throughout their generations.
YHVH said to Moses and to Aaron: This is the statute of the passover: Any son of a foreigner, he shall not eat of it.
Yet any man's servant acquired with silver, when you have circumcised him, then he may eat of it.
A settler or a hirling, he may not eat of it.
In one house shall it be eaten. You shall not bring forth any of the flesh from the house to the outside; and a bone in it you shall not break.
The whole congregation of the sons of Israel shall do it.
In case a sojourner is sojourning with you and makes a passover to YHVH, every make of his is to be circumcised, and then he may draw near to make it, and he will become as a native of the land. Yet anyone uncircumcised, he shall not eat of it.
One law shall there be for both the native and for the sojourner sojourning in your midst.
And all the sons of Israel did so; just as YHVH had instructed Moses and Aaron, thus they did.
It came to be on this very day when YHVH brought forth the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt with their hosts,
that YHVH spoke to Moses saying:
Hallow to Me every firstborn male, opening up every womb, among the sons of Israel, among human and among beast. It is Mine.
Moses said to the people: You are to remember this day on which you went forth from the land of Egypt, from the house of servants, for with steadfastness of hand YHVH brought you forth hence; then nothing leavened should be eaten.
Today you are going forth in the month of Aviv.
It will come to be when YHVH your God shall have brought you to the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Girgashite, the Hivite and the Jebusite about which He swore to your fathers to give to you, a land gushing with milk and honey, then you will serve with this service in this month.
Seven days shall you eat unleavened cakes, and on the seventh day there shall be a celebration to YHVH.
Unleavened cakes shall be eaten seven days; and nothing leavened shall be seen with you, and no yeast should be seen with you within your entire boundary.
Then you will tell your son in that day, saying: It is for the sake of this which YHVH did for me when I went forth from Egypt.
And you will come to have this as a sign on your hand and as a reminder between your eyes that the law of YHVH may be in your mouth; for with a steadfast hand YHVH brought you forth from Egypt.
You will observe this statute at its appointed time from days to days.
It will come to be when YHVH your God shall bring you into the land of the Canaanite just as He swore to you and to your fathers, that He will give it to you,
then you will set apart for YHVH every male opening up the womb. Every male opening up the womb, the yeanling of a beast which you shall come to have, the males shall be for YHVH.
Yet every male opening up a donkey shall you ransom with a flockling, and should you not ransom it then you will break its neck. Yet every firstborn of a human among your sons shall you ransom.
When it comes to be that your son is asking you tomorrow, saying: What does this mean? then you will say to him, With steadfastness of hand YHVH brought us forth from Egypt, from the house of servants.
When it came to be that Pharaoh was obstinate to dismiss us, then YHVH killed every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of human unto the firstborn of beast. Therefore I am sacrificing to YHVH all the males opening up the womb; yet I am ransoming every firstborn of my sons.
Now it comes to be as a sign on your hand and as brow-bands between your eyes; for with steadfastness of hand YHVH brought us forth from Egypt.
It came to be when Pharaoh had dismissed the people, that God did not guide them by way of the land of the Philistines, though it was near, for God said: Lest the people should regret when they see war, and return to Egypt.
Hence God caused the people to turn about by the wilderness road of the Sea of Weeds. Deployed in five sections, the sons of Israel ascended from the land of Egypt.
And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him; for Joseph had adjured, yea adjured the sons of Israel, saying: God shall commit, yea commit it to you, that you will bring up my bones with you from this place.
When they journeyed from Succoth and encamped at Etham, on the fringe of the wilderness,
then YHVH was going before them by day in a column of cloud to guide them along the way, and by night in a column of fire, to give light for them to go by day and night.
The column of cloud by day and the column of fire by night did not remove from the presence of the people.
YHVH spoke to Moses saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel that they may return and encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, before Baal-zephon. Over against it you shall encamp by the sea.
So Pharaoh will say of the sons of Israel: They are perplexed in the land; the wilderness has closed in on them.
Thus I will make the heart of Pharaoh steadfast, so he will pursue after them. Then I will be glorified in Pharaoh and in all his army; and the Egyptians will know that I am YHVH. Hence they did so.
When it was told to the king of Egypt that the people had run away, the heart of Pharaoh and his servants was turned as to the people, and they said: What is this we have done that we dismissed the sons of Israel from our service?
So he hitched up his chariots and took his people with him.
And he took six hundred chosen chariots and all the riders of Egypt and third fighters in all of them.
Thus YHVH made the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt steadfast; and he pursued after the sons of Israel. The sons of Israel were going forth with a high hand,
yet the Egyptians were pursuing after them, and they overtook them encamping by the sea all the horse-chariots of Pharaoh, his horsemen and his army at Pi-hahiroth before Baal-zephon.
So Pharaoh, he drew near. Then the sons of Israel lifted their eyes, and behold, the Egyptians were journeying after them. Now they became exceedingly fearful, and the sons of Israel cried to YHVH.
They said to Moses: Is it for lack of tombs in Egypt that you have taken us to die in the wilderness? What is this you have done to us bringing us forth from Egypt?
Is not this the word which we spoke to you in Egypt, saying: Leave off from us and let us serve the Egyptians, for it better for us to serve the Egyptians than for us to die in the wilderness.
Then Moses said to the people: Do not fear! Station yourselves and see the salvation of YHVH which He shall work for you today, for you see the Egyptians today, you shall not anymore see them again unto the eon.
YHVH, He shall fight for you; as for you, you shall be silent.
YHVH said to Moses: Why are you crying to Me? Speak to the sons of Israel that they should journey.
And you, raise high your rod and stretch out your hand over the sea and split it, that the sons of Israel may enter into the midst of the sea on dry ground.
And I, behold Me making the heart of the Egyptians steadfast that they may enter after them; for I shall be glorified over Pharaoh and over all his army, over his chariots and over his horsemen.
Then the Egyptians will know that I am YHVH when I am glorified over Pharaoh, over his chariots and over his horsemen.
Hence the messenger of the One, God, who was going before the camp of Israel, journeyed and went behind them. Also the column of cloud journeyed from before them and stood behind them.
Thus he came between the camp of Egypt and the camp of Israel. Over there came the cloud and darkness, yet here he lightened up the night. So this one did not come near to that one all the night.
Then Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and, by a strong east wind all the night, YHVH caused the sea to go. Thus He made in the sea a drained area when the waters were split apart.
Then the sons of Israel entered into the midst of the sea on dry ground, and the waters were to them a wall on their right and on their left.
Now the Egyptians pursued and entered after them, all the horses of Pharaoh, his chariots and his horsemen, into the midst of the sea.
It came to be, in the morning vigil, when YHVH gazed on the camp of the Egyptians in the column of fire and cloud, that He discomfited the camp of the Egypt.
Then He clogged the wheels of his chariots and made them drive heavily. Then the Egyptians said: Let me flee from the face of Israel, for YHVH, He fights for them against Egypt.
YHVH said to Moses: Stretch out your hand over the sea that the waters may return on the Egyptians, on their chariots and on their horsemen.
So Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the sea returned before morning to its perennial flow, while the Egyptians were fleeing to meet it. Thus YHVH shook off the Egyptians, in the midst of the sea,
for the waters returned and covered the chariots and the horsemen, all the army of Pharaoh which had been entering after them into the sea. Not even one of them remained.
Yet the sons of Israel, they went on dry ground in the midst of the sea, and the waters were to them a wall on their right and on their left.
Thus YHVH saved Israel on that day from the hand of Egypt. Then Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the shore of the sea;
and Israel discerned the great hand with which YHVH had done this to Egypt. So the people feared YHVH and believed in YHVH and in Moses His servant.
Then Moses and the sons of Israel sang this song to YHVH and spoke saying: Let me sing to YHVH, for He is august, yea august: The horse and its rider He heaved into the sea.
Yah is my strength and my melody, and He become mine for salvation. This is my El; I shall adorn Him, God of my father, I shall exalt Him.
YHVH is a Man of war; YHVH is His Name.
The chariots of Pharaoh and his army He shot into the sea, and the choice of his third fighters sank into the Sea of Weeds.
Abysses covered them; they descended into shadowy depths as a stone.
Your right hand, YHVH, was ennobled in vigor; Your right hand, YHVH, was harrying the enemy.
And by the vastness of Your pomp You were demolishing those rising against You; You were sending forth Your heat; it was devouring them as straw.
And by the wind of Your anger the waters were denuded, the floods were stood up as a waterspout; the abysses were curdled in the heart of the sea.
The enemy said: I shall pursue! I shall overtake! I shall apportion the loot! My soul's desire shall be fulfilled on them! I shall unsheathe my sword! My hand shall evict them!
You made a breeze with Your wind; the sea covered them. They submerged as lead in the noble waters.
Who is like You among the elim, YHVH? Who is like You, ennobled in holiness, fear-inspiring in praiseworthy deeds, working marvels?
You stretched out Your right hand; the earth swallowed them up.
You guided in Your kindness this people You have redeemed; You will conduct them by Your strength to Your holy homestead.
The peoples have heard; they are disturbed. Travail, it has taken hold of the dwellers of Philistia.
Then the sheiks of Edom are flustered; the arbiters of Moab, quivering took hold of them. All the dwellers of Canaan are dissolved.
Dread and awe are falling on them; by the greatness of Your arm they are still as a stone, until Your people are passing by, YHVH, until this people whom You have acquired are passing by.
You shall bring them in and plant them in the mount of Your allotment, the site for Your dwelling which You have contrived, YHVH, the sanctuary, YHVH, which Your hands have established.
YHVH, He shall reign for the eon and further.
When the horses of Pharaoh had entered with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, then YHVH returned the waters of the sea over them. Yet the sons of Israel, they had gone on dry ground in the midst of the sea!
Then Miriam, the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took the tambourine in her hand, and all the women went forth after her with tambourines and with choruses.
And Miriam responded to them: Sing to YHVH, for He is august, yea august: The horse and its rider He heaved into the sea.
Now Moses caused Israel to journey from the Sea of Weeds. So they went forth to the wilderness of Shur, and went three days into the wilderness, but they found no waters.
When they came to Marah, they were unable to drink the waters of Marah, for they were bitter; therefore one called its name Marah.
Then the people grumbled against Moses, saying: What shall we drink?
So he cried out to YHVH, and YHVH directed him to a tree. So he flung it into the waters, and the waters were sweet. There He made for them a statute and a judgment, and there He probed them,
for He said: If you shall hearken, yea hearken to the voice of YHVH your God and do what is upright in His eyes, and give ear to His instructions and observe all His statutes, then all the illnesses which I placed on the Egyptians I shall not place on you, for I am YHVH your Healer.
Then they came to Elim; there were twelve springs of water and seventy palms there. So they encamped there by the waters.
They journeyed from Elim; and the whole congregation of the sons of Israel entered into the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their going forth from the land of Egypt.
Then the whole congregation of the sons of Israel grumbled against Moses and against Aaron in the wilderness;
and the sons of Israel said to them: O that we had died by the hand of YHVH in the land of Egypt when we sat over the flesh pots when we ate bread to satisfaction, for you have brought us forth to this wilderness to put this entire assembly to death with famine.
Then YHVH said to Moses: Behold Me causing bread from the heavens to rain for you. When the people will go forth they will pick up a day's matter in its day, that I may probe them, whether they shall go by My law or not.
And it will come to be on the sixth day when they prepare what they are bringing in that there will come to be a duplicate amount over that which they are picking up day by day.
So Moses and Aaron said to all the sons of Israel: This evening, then you will know that it was YHVH Who brought you forth from the land of Egypt.
And in the morning then you will see the glory of YHVH since He heard your grumblings against YHVH. What are we that you are grumbling against us?
And Moses said: Since YHVH gives to you in the evening flesh to eat and bread in the morning to satisfy, when YHVH heard your grumblings which you are grumbling against Him, then what are we? Not against us are your grumblings, but rather against YHVH.
Then Moses said to Aaron: Say to the whole congregation of the sons of Israel, Come near before YHVH, for He has heard your grumblings.
And it came to be as Aaron spoke to the whole congregation of the sons of Israel, that they turned around to the wilderness, and behold, the glory of YHVH, it appeared in the cloud.
Then YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
I have heard the grumblings of the sons of Israel. Speak to them saying, Between the evening hours you shall eat flesh, and in the morning you shall be satisfied with bread. Then you will realize that I am YHVH your God.
When it came to be in the evening, quail came up and covered the camp. In the morning the lying of the night mist came to be around the camp;
and the lying of the night mist went up; and behold, on the surface of the wilderness was a thin flake, thin as hoarfrost, on the earth.
When the sons of Israel saw it, they said, each man to his brother: What is it? for they did not know what it was, So Moses said to them: It is the bread which YHVH has given to you for food.
This is the matter which YHVH has instructed: Pick up of it each man corresponding to his eating, an omer for a poll, numbering your souls: each man for those who are in his tent shall you take.
Now the sons of Israel did so. Some picked up an increase and some a decrease.
They measured with an omer, yet the increase had caused no superfluity, and the decrease had caused no lack. Each man corresponding to his eating they had picked it up.
Then Moses said to them: Let no one reserve any of it until the morning.
Yet they did not hearken to Moses, and some men reserved some of it until the morning. So it rose high with worms and stank. And Moses was wrathful over them.
They picked it up morning by morning, each man corresponding to his eating. When the sun was warm then it melted.
Now it came to be on the sixth day they picked up a duplicate amount of bread, two omers for one. When all the princes of the congregation came and told it to Moses,
then he said to them: This is what YHVH has spoken, A cessation, a holy sabbath to YHVH is tomorrow. What you are baking, bake, and what you are cooking, cook, and all the superfluity, leave it in your charge until the morning.
So they left it until the morning, just as Moses had instructed, yet it caused no stink, and no maggots came to be in it.
Then Moses said: Eat it today, for there is a sabbath today to YHVH! Today you shall not find it in the field.
Six days shall you pick it up, yet on the seventh day, the sabbath, none shall come to be on it.
And it came to be on the seventh day some of the people went forth to pick it up, and they found none.
Hence YHVH said to Moses: How long will you refuse to observe My instructions and My laws?
See! For YHVH, He has given to you the sabbath; therefore He is giving to you on the sixth day bread for two days. Be seated, each man in his place; let no one go forth from his place on the seventh day.
So the people ceased on the seventh day.
The sons of Israel called its name Manna. It was as a seed of white coriander and its taste as cakes with honey.
Then Moses said: This is the word which YHVH has instructed, Take the fullness of an omer of it as a charge throughout your generations, that they may see the bread which I gave you to eat in the wilderness when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.
And Moses said to Aaron: Take one urn and dispense therein the fullness of an omer of manna, and leave it before YHVH as a charge throughout your generations,
just as YHVH has instructed Moses. So Aaron left it before the testimony as a charge.
As for the sons of Israel, they ate the manna forty years until their coming to a land indwelt. The manna, they ate it until their coming to the fringe of the land of Canaan.
(Now an omer, it is a tenth of the ephah.)
The whole congregation of the sons of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin in their journeys at the bidding of YHVH, and they encamped in Rephidim; yet there was no water for the people to drink.
So the people contended with Moses and said: Give to us water that we may drink. And Moses said to them: Why are you contending with me? Why are you probing YHVH?
When the people thirsted there for water, the people grumbled against Moses and said: Why is this that you brought us up from Egypt to put me and my sons and my cattle to death by thirst?
So Moses cried to YHVH, saying: What shall I do for this people? A little further and they will stone me.
YHVH said to Moses: Pass before the people, and take with you some of the elders of Israel; and your rod with which you smote the waterway take in your hand and go.
Behold Me standing before you there, on the rock at Mount Horeb. You will smite the rock, and water will come forth from it, and the people will drink. Moses did so before the eyes of the elders of Israel.
Hence he called the name of the place Massah and Meribah on account of the contention of the sons of Israel and on account of their probing YHVH, saying, Is YHVH among us or is He not?
Then Amalek came and fought with Israel in Rephidim.
And Moses said to Joshua: Choose men for us and go forth. Fight with Amalek. Tomorrow I will be stationed on the summit of the hill with the rod of God in my hand.
Joshua did just as Moses said to him, to fight with Amalek. As for Moses, Aaron and Hur, they ascended the summit of the hill.
Now it came to be just as Moses was raising high his hands that Israel had the mastery, and just as he was giving his hands rest then Amalek had the mastery.
When the hands of Moses became heavy, they took a stone and placed it beneath him, and he sat on it. As for Aaron and Hur, they upheld his hands, from this side one and and from that side one. So it came to be that his hands were constant until sunset.
Thus Joshua defeated Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.
Then YHVH said to Moses: Write this as a reminder in a scroll, and put it in the ears of Joshua that I shall wipe out, yea wipe out the remembrance of Amalek from under the heavens.
So Moses built an altar and called its name YHVH-nissi
and said: For a hand is against the throne of Yah; YHVH has a war with Amalek from generation to generation!
Jethro, the priest of Midian, father-in-law of Moses, heard of all that God had done for Moses and for Israel, His people, when YHVH had brought Israel forth from Egypt.
Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses, took Zipporah, the wife of Moses, to him after her dismissal,
and her two sons, of whom the name of one was Gershom, (for he said: A sojourner became I in a foreign land).
And the name of the other one was Eliezer: (for God of my father is my Helper, and He rescued me from the sword of Pharaoh).
Now Jethro, father-in-law of Moses, and his sons, and his wife, came to Moses, to the wilderness where he was encamping at the Mount of the One, God.
And he sent word to Moses: I, your father-in-law, Jethro, am coming to you, and your wife and her two sons with her.
Then Moses went forth to meet his father-in-law; and he bowed himself down and kissed him. After they had asked, each man of his associate, concerning his welfare, then they came to the tent,
and Moses related to his father-in-law all that YHVH had done to Pharaoh and to Egypt concerning Israel, all the suspense which found them along the way and how YHVH had rescued them.
So Jethro exhilarated over all the good which YHVH had done to Israel, whom He had rescued from the hand of Egypt.
Hence Jethro said: Blessed be YHVH Who has rescued you from the hand of Egypt and from the hand of Pharaoh, Who has rescued the people from under the hand of Egypt.
Now I know that YHVH is greater than all God, yea in the matter in which they were arrogant against them.
Then Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses, took an ascent offering along with sacrifices for God, and Aaron and all the elders of Israel came to eat bread with the father-in-law of Moses, before the One, God.
It came to be on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people. So the people stood by Moses from the morning until evening.
When the father-in-law of Moses saw all that he was doing for the people, he said: What is this matter that you are doing for the people? For what reason are you sitting by yourself alone with all the people stationing themselves by you from morning until evening?
Moses said to his father-in-law: Because the people are coming to me to inquire of God.
When they come to have a matter of dispute they come to me, and I judge between a man and his associate, and I make known to them the statutes of the One, God, and His laws.
The father-in-law of Moses said to him: The thing which you are doing is not good.
You are wearing out, yea wearing out both yourself and this people who are with you, for this matter is too heavy for you. You cannot do it by yourself alone.
Now, hearken to my voice. Let me counsel you, and may God come to be with you. Be you for the people toward the One, God, and you bring the matters to the One, God.
You will warn them with the statutes and the laws and make known to them the way in which they shall go and the deeds which they shall do.
Now you shall perceive among all the people men of ability, fearful of God, men of truth, hating gain. You will place these over them as chiefs of thousands, chiefs of hundreds, chiefs of fifties and chiefs of tens.
And they will judge the people in every season. Yet it will be that every great matter of dispute they shall bring to you, and every small matter shall they judge themselves. Lighten yourself from what is on you, and they will bear it with you.
If you shall do this thing then God will instruct you further, so you can stand. Moreover, all this people, it shall come upon its place in peace.
So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father-in-law and did all that he had said.
Moses chose men of ability from all Israel and set them as heads over the people, chiefs of thousands, chiefs of hundreds, chiefs of fifties and chiefs of tens.
They judged the people in every season. The hard matter were they bringing to Moses, and every small matter they were judging themselves.
Then Moses dismissed his father-in-law; so he went by himself to his land.
In the third month after the going forth of the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt, on this day they entered the wilderness of Sinai.
When they journeyed from Rephidim and entered the wilderness of Sinai then they encamped in the wilderness. While Israel encamped there in front of the mountain,
Moses, he ascended to the One, God. Then YHVH called to him from the mountain, saying: Thus shall you say to the house of Jacob and tell to the sons of Israel,
You have seen what I did to the Egyptians when I bore you on vultures' wings and brought you to Myself.
Now, if you shall hearken, yea hearken to My voice and observe My covenant then you will become Mine, a special possession, above all the peoples, for Mine is all the earth.
As for you, you shall become Mine, a kingdom of priests and a holy nation. These are the words which you shall speak to the sons of Israel.
So Moses came and called for the elders of the people and placed before them all these words which YHVH had instructed him.
Now all the people responded together and said: All that YHVH speaks we shall do. When Moses brought back the words of the people to YHVH,
then YHVH said to Moses: Behold, I am coming to you in a thick cloud in order that the people shall hear when I speak with you, and moreover, in you shall they believe for the eon. So Moses told the words of the people to YHVH.
Then YHVH said to Moses: Go to the people, and you will hallow them today and tomorrow; let them rinse their garments
and come to be prepared for the third day; for on the third day YHVH shall descend on Mount Sinai before the eyes of all the people.
Also you shall set a boundary for the people round about, saying: Guard yourselves concerning ascent into the mountain or touching its outmost part. Everyone touching the mountain shall be put to death, yea death.
No hand shall touch him, for he shall be stoned, yea stoned or shot, yea shot; whether beast or man, he shall not live. When the alarm horn draws forth, they may ascend onto the mountain.
So Moses descended from the mountain to the people; he hallowed the people, and they rinsed their garments.
Then he said to the people: Be prepared for three days; do not come close to a woman.
It came to be on the third day, at the coming of the morning, that there came to be sounds and flashes and a heavy cloud on the mount, and the sound of a trumpet, exceedingly steadfast. Hence all the people who were in the camp trembled.
Yet Moses brought the people forth from the camp to meet the One, God. So they stationed themselves at the nether part of the mountain.
As for Mount Sinai, all of it smoked in view of the fact that YHVH descended on it in fire; its smoke ascended as the smoke of a limekiln, and the entire mountain trembled exceedingly.
While the sound of the trumpet came to be going, becoming exceedingly steadfast, Moses was speaking, and the One, God was answering with a loud voice.
YHVH descended on Mount Sinai to the summit of the mountain; then YHVH called Moses to the summit of the mountain, and Moses ascended.
YHVH said to Moses: Descend! Testify to the people lest they demolish the boundaries to YHVH in order to see, and many of them fall.
Moreover, the priests who are coming close to YHVH, they shall sanctify themselves lest YHVH breach forth against them.
Now Moses said to YHVH: The people cannot ascend to Mount Sinai because You testified to us, saying: Set a boundary about the mountain, and you will hallow it.
YHVH said to him: Go, descend. Then you will ascend, you and Aaron with you; yet the priests and the people must not demolish the boundaries to ascend to YHVH, lest He breach forth against them.
So Moses descended to the people and spoke to them.
God spoke all these words, saying:
I am YHVH your God Who brought you forth from the land of Egypt, from the house of servants.
You shall not come to have other God in preference to Me.
You shall not make for yourself a carving nor any representation of that in the heavens above or that on the earth beneath, or that in the waters beneath the earth.
You shall not bow yourself down to them, nor be made to serve them, for I, YHVH your God, am a jealous El, visiting the depravity of the fathers on the sons, on the third and on the fourth generation, to those hating Me,
yet doing kindness to thousands, to those loving Me and observing My instructions.
You shall not take up the name of YHVH your God for futility, for YHVH shall not hold innocent him who takes up His name for futility.
You are to remember the sabbath day to hallow it.
Six days shall you serve and do all your work,
yet the seventh day is a sabbath to YHVH your God. You shall not do any work of slavery, you, your son or your daughter, your servant or your maidservant, your bull, your donkey or your beast, or your sojourner who is within your gates.
For in six days YHVH dealt with the heavens and earth, the sea and all that is in them, and He stopped on the seventh day. Therefore, YHVH blessed the sabbath day and hallowed it.
Glorify your father and your mother, that your days may be prolonged on the ground which YHVH your God is giving to you.
You shall not murder.
You shall not commit sexual perversion.
You shall not steal.
You shall not answer against your associate with false testimony.
You shall not covet the house of your associate. You shall not covet the wife of your associate, his field, his servant or his maidservant, his bull, his donkey or anything which is your associate's.
All the people were discerning the voices and the torches and the sound of the trumpet and the mountain asmoke. And the people saw and roved about and stood afar.
They said to Moses: Speak you with us that we may hear; yet God must not speak with us lest we die.
Then Moses said to the people: Do not fear, for in order to probe you the One, God has come, and in order that the fear of Him should come over your faces, that you may not sin.
Then the people stood afar, yet Moses, he came close to the murkiness where the One, God was.
YHVH said to Moses: Thus shall you say to the sons of Israel, You have seen that from the heavens I have spoken with you.
You shall not make anything beside Me: no God of silver nor God of gold shall you make for yourselves.
An altar of ground soil shall you make for Me, and you will sacrifice on it your ascent offerings and your peace offerings, your flock and your herd. In every place where I shall record My name I shall come to you and will bless you.
And if you shall make an altar of stones for Me you shall not build it with them trimmed; in case you have swung your sword against it, then you have profaned it.
And you shall not ascent on My altar by stairs so that your nakedness be not exposed on it.
Now these are the judgments which you shall place before them.
When you buy a Hebrew servant, six years shall he serve you, and in the seventh he shall go forth free gratuitously.
If by himself he came, by himself he shall go forth. If he was the possessor of a wife, then his wife will go forth with him.
Yet if his lord should give him a wife, and she bears for him sons or daughters, the wife and her children shall become her lord's, and he may go forth by himself.
Yet if the servant should say, yea say, I love my lord, my wife and my sons; I shall not go forth free,
then his lord will bring him close to God, and bring him close to the door or to the jamb, and his lord will bore his ear with an awl; and he will serve him for the eon.
When a man sells his daughter as a maidservant, she shall not go forth as the male servants go forth.
If she is displeasing in the eyes of her lord, who has appointed her for himself, then he will let her be ransomed. To a foreign people he shall not rule to sell her because of his treachery with her.
If he is appointing her for his son, he shall deal with her as is customary with daughters.
If he is taking another for himself, he shall not diminish her meat, her covering and her cohabitation.
If these three things he is not doing for her then she will go forth gratuitously. There is no money paid.
The smiter of a man that dies shall be put to death, yea death.
But if he had no malicious intent, yet the One, God, He had fated him into his hand, then I set for you a place where he shall flee.
Yet in case a man was planning arrogantly against his associate so as to kill him by craft, from My altar shall you take him to die.
The smiter of his father or his mother shall be put to death, yea death.
He who steals a man whether he sells him or he is found in his hand, he shall be put to death, yea death.
The one maledicting his father or his mother shall be put to death, yea death.
When men contend, and a man smites his associate with a stone or with a fist, and he does not die yet falls into bed,
then if he shall rise and walk about outside on his staff the smiter is held innocent, but for his cessation he shall provide and shall make him heal, yea heal.
When a man smites his servant or his maidservant with a club and he dies under his hand, he shall be avenged, yea avenged;
only if he stands a day or two days he shall not be avenged, for he is his silver.
When men strive together and strike a pregnant woman, and her child comes forth, and no mishap comes to be, he shall be fined, yea fined just as the woman's possessor shall impose on him, and he will pay through mediators.
Yet if a mishap comes to be then you will give soul for soul,
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
scorching for scorching, injury for injury, welt for welt.
When a man smites the eye of his servant or the eye of his maidservant and ruins it he shall dismiss him free for his eye.
And if he causes a tooth of his servant or a tooth of his maidservant to fall out he shall dismiss him free for his tooth.
When a bull gores a man or a woman and he dies, the bull shall be stoned, yea stoned, and its flesh shall not be eaten, yet the possessor of the bull shall be held innocent.
But if it was a bull given to goring heretofore, and it was testified to its possessor, yet he did not keep it in, and it caused a man or a woman to die, the bull, it shall be stoned, and, moreover, its possessor, he shall be put to death.
If a sheltering ransom is imposed on him then he will give as a ransom for his soul according to all which is set on him.
Whether it gores a son or gores a daughter, according to this custom shall it be done to him.
If the bull gores a servant or a maidservant, thirty shekels of silver shall he give to his lord, and the bull, it shall be stoned.
When a man opens a cistern, or when a man digs a cistern, yet does not cover it, and a bull or a donkey falls therein,
the possessor of the cistern, he shall repay; he shall restore silver to its possessor, and the dead beast shall become his.
When a man's bull strikes the bull of his associate and it dies, then they will sell the living bull and divide the silver for it, and, moreover, they shall divide the dead one.
Or when it is known that it was a bull given to goring heretofore, and its possessor did not keep it in, he shall repay, yea repay bull for bull, and the dead one shall become his.
When a man steals a bull or a flockling and slaughters it or sells it, five oxen shall he repay for the bull and four small cattle for the flockling.
(If the thief is found while burrowing and is smitten so that he dies, there is no blood-guilt because of him.
But if the sun has risen on him there is blood-guilt because of him.) He shall repay, yea repay; if he has nothing then he will be sold for his theft.
If the theft is found, yea found alive in his hand, whether bull or donkey or flockling, he shall only repay double.
When a man causes a field or a vineyard to be grazed down, and he lets his livestock go loose, so that it grazes down another's field, then from the best of his field and the best of his vineyard shall he repay.
When fire goes forth and it finds thorns, and the shock or the raised grain or the whole field is devoured, the one causing the consuming fire to consume shall repay, yea repay.
When a man gives to his associate silver or articles to keep, and they are stolen from the man's house, if the thief is found he shall repay double.
If the thief is not found then the possessor of the house will be brought near to God to show whether or not he has put forth his hand on the work of his associate.
In every manner of transgression over a bull, over a donkey, over a flockling, over raiment or over every lost thing which one says that this is it, unto God shall come the word of the two of them. Whom God shall condemn, he shall repay double to his associate.
When a man gives to his associate a donkey or a bull or a flockling or any beast to keep, and it dies or is broken or is captured without anyone seeing it,
the oath of YHVH shall come to be between them both to show whether or not he has put forth his hand on the property of his associate; then its possessor will take it, and he shall not repay.
But if it is stolen, yea stolen, from him, he shall repay its possessor.
If it is torn to pieces, yea torn to pieces, he shall bring the thing torn to pieces, he shall bring the thing torn to pieces as testimony, and he shall not repay.
When a man asks something from his associate, and it is broken or dies when its possessor is not with it, he shall repay, yea repay.
If its possessor was with it, he shall not repay. If it was hired it came for its hire.
In case a man entices a virgin who is not betrothed and lies with her he shall pay, yea pay her bride-price as a wife for himself.
If her father refuses, yea refuses to give her to him, he shall weigh out silver according to the bride-price for virgins.
You shall not let an enchantress live.
Anyone lying with a beast shall be put to death, yea death.
Anyone sacrificing to any God is doomed, unless it be to YHVH, to Him alone.
As for the sojourner, you shall not tyrannize nor oppress him, for you came to be sojourners in the land of Egypt.
Any widow or orphan you shall not humiliate.
If you humiliate, yea humiliate him, in case he should cry, yea cry to Me, I shall hear, yea hear his cry,
and My anger will grow hot, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives will become widows and your sons orphans.
If you obligate My people, the humble with you, with silver, you shall not be as a moneylender to him; you shall not impose interest on him.
If you take in pledge, yea in pledge the raiment of your associate, previous to sunset you shall restore it to him,
for it is his only covering. It is his garment for his skin: wherein shall he lie? When it comes to be that he is crying to Me, then I will hear, for I am gracious.
You shall not maledict God, and a prince among your people you shall not curse.
You shall not delay to offer from your fullness and your fruit juice. The firstborn of your sons shall you give to Me.
So shall you do with your bull, with your flock and your donkey. Seven days it shall be with its mother; on the eighth day shall you give it to Me.
You shall come to be holy men for Me; so you shall not eat flesh torn to pieces in the field; you shall fling it to the dog.
You shall not carry a futile report; do not set your hand with the wicked to become a malicious witness.
You shall not come after the many to do evil, and you shall not respond in a contention to turn aside after the many, to turn aside judgment.
Neither shall you honor the poor in his contention.
In case you come upon the bull of your enemy or his donkey going astray you shall return, yea return it to him.
In case you see the donkey of one hating you reclining under its load, then you will halt from forsaking him. You shall set free, yea set it free with him.
You shall not turn aside the judgment of your needy in his contention.
From a false matter you shall be far; and the innocent and the righteous one you must not kill, for I shall not justify the wicked one.
You shall not take a bribe, for the bribe is blinding the unclosed eyes and is subverting the words of the righteous.
You shall not oppress a sojourner, for you know the soul of the sojourner, for you came to be sojourners in the land of Egypt.
Six years shall you sow your land, and you will gather its yield;
but in the seventh you shall release it and abandon it, that the needy of your people may eat, and the field animal shall eat their leavings. So shall you do to your vineyard and to your olive trees.
Six days shall you do your tasks, and on the seventh day you shall cease, that your bull and your donkey may rest, and the son of your maidservant and the sojourner be refreshed.
You shall beware in all that I say to you. And the name of other God you shall not mention; nor let it be heard coming out of your mouth.
Three times shall you celebrate to Me in the year:
you shall observe the celebration of unleavened cakes; seven days shall you eat unleavened cakes, just as I instructed you, at the appointed time in the month Aviv, for in it you went forth from Egypt, and none shall appear before Me empty-handed:
also observe the celebration of the harvest of the firstfruits of your yields from what you are sowing in the field: and observe the celebration of ingathering at the going forth of the year, when you gather your yields from the field.
Three times in the year every male of you shall appear before the Lord YHVH.
You shall not sacrifice the blood of My sacrifice with what is leavened, nor shall the fat of My celebration lodge until the morning.
You shall bring the first of the firstfruits of your ground to the house of YHVH your God. You shall not cook a kid in the milk of its mother.
Behold, I shall be sending a messenger before you to keep you in the way and to bring you to the place which I have prepared.
Guard yourself in view of him and hear his voice. Do not embitter him, for he shall not bear with your transgression, for My name is within him.
In case you should hearken, yea hearken to his voice and do all that I am speaking, then I will be Enemy of your enemies and will be Foe of your foes.
For My messenger shall go before you and will bring you to the Amorite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Canaanite, the Gergashite, the Hivite and the Jebusite, and I will suppress them.
You shall not bow yourself down to their God nor be made to serve them, nor shall you do according to their deeds, for you shall demolish, yea demolish them and break down, yea break down their monuments.
You shall serve YHVH your God, and He will bless your bread and your water. And I will take away illness from among you.
None shall come to be miscarrying or barren in your land. I shall make the number of your days full.
I shall send the dread of Me before you, I will discomfit all the people against whom you shall come, and I will make all your enemies turn the nape of their necks to you.
I will send the hornet before you, and it will drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite and the Hittite from before you.
I shall not drive them out from before you in one year lest the land should become desolate, and the field animal be many against you.
Little by little shall I drive them out from before you until you are fruitful and you are allotted the land.
And I will set your boundary from the Sea of Weeds unto the sea of the Philistines and from the wilderness unto the Stream, for I shall give into your hand the dwellers of the land, and you will drive them out from your presence.
You shall not contract a covenant with them or with their God.
They shall not dwell in your land lest they should make you sin against Me so that you serve their God, and that it should come to be a trap for you.
Then to Moses He said: Ascend to YHVH, you and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel, and bow yourselves down from afar.
Yet Moses will come close to YHVH, to Him alone; but they shall not come close, and the people shall not ascent with him.
So Moses came and related to the people all the words of YHVH and all the judgments. Then all the people responded with one voice and said: All the words which YHVH has spoken we shall do.
Now Moses wrote all the words of YHVH. And he rose early in the morning and built an altar below the mountain and twelve stone monuments for the twelve tribes of Israel.
Then he sent youths of the sons of Israel, and the brought up ascent offerings and sacrificed young bulls as sacrifices of peace offerings to YHVH.
Moses took half of the blood and put it in goblets, and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.
And he took the scroll of the covenant and read it in the ears of the people; so they said: All that YHVH has spoken we shall do and hearken to.
Now Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people and said: Behold the blood of the covenant which YHVH contracts with you concerning all these matters.
Then Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel ascended.
And they saw God of Israel and beneath His feet as it were a work of sapphire tiling, as the very heavens for purity.
To the selectmen of the sons of Israel He put not forth His hand, yet they perceived the One, God, and ate and drank.
YHVH said to Moses: Ascend to Me to the mountain and be there, and I shall give to you the stone tablets, the law and the instructions which I wrote to direct them.
So Moses and Joshua, his minister, rose, and Moses ascended to the mountain of the One, God.
And to the elders he said: Wait for us in this place until we return to you. And behold, Aaron and Hur are with you. Anyone who has matters, let him come to them.
When Moses ascended to the mountain, the cloud covered the mountain,
and the glory of YHVH tabernacled over Mount Sinai. The cloud covered it six days. Then YHVH called to Moses on the seventh day from the midst of the cloud.
Now the appearance of the glory of YHVH was as a devouring fire on the summit of the mountain, to the eyes of the sons of Israel.
So Moses entered into the midst of the cloud and ascended into the mountain. Moses came to be on the mountain forty days and forty nights.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel that they take for Me a heave offering. From every man whose heart is willing shall you take My heave offering.
And this is the heave offering which you shall take from them: gold, silver and copper,
blue, purple and double-dipped crimson, cambric and goats' hair,
reddened rams' hides and azure hides and acacia boards;
oil for the luminary, aromatics for the anointing oil and for the incense of spices;
stones of onyx and stones for fillings for the vestment and for the breastplate.
Thus they will make for Me a sanctuary, and I will tabernacle in their midst.
According to all that I am showing you, the model of the tabernacle and the model of all its furnishings, thus shall you make it.
They will make the coffer of acacia boards, two cubits and a half its length and a cubit and a half its width and a cubit and a half its rise.
You will overlay it; with pure gold inside and outside shall you overlay it. You will make on it a flange of gold round about.
You will cast four rings of gold for it, and put them on its four footings with two rings on its one angle wall and two rings on its second angle wall.
You will make poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold,
and insert the poles in the rings on the the angle walls of the coffer to carry the coffer with them.
The poles shall come to be in the rings of the coffer. They shall not be withdrawn from it.
You will put the testimony which I shall give to you into the coffer.
You will make a propitiatory shelter of pure gold, two cubits and a half its length and a cubit and a half its width.
You will make two cherubim of gold; you shall hammer them a stiff shell of one piece with the two ends of the propitiatory shelter.
Make one cherub from this end and one cherub from that end. Of one piece with the propitiatory shelter you shall make the cherubim at its two ends.
The cherubim will come to be with spreading wings above, overshadowing with their wings over the propitiatory shelter with their faces each to his fellow. Toward the propitiatory shelter the faces of the cherubim shall come to be.
Then you will put the propitiatory shelter on the coffer from above; and you shall put the testimony which I shall give to you into the coffer.
I will keep appointment with you there, and I will speak with you above the propitiatory shelter from between the two cherubim which are over the coffer of the testimony of all which I am instructing you for the sons of Israel.
You will make a table of acacia boards, two cubits its length and a cubit its width and a cubit and a half its rise.
You will overlay it with pure gold and make for it a flange of gold round about.
You will make for it a border of a handbreadth round about and make a flange of gold for its border round about.
You will make for it four rings of gold and put the rings on the four edges which are for its four feet.
The rings shall come to correspond with the border for housings for the poles, to carry the table.
You will make the poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold, and the table will be carried by them.
You will make its dishes and its spoons and its chalices and its waste pans with which libations are made; of pure gold shall you make them.
Then you will put the bread of the presence on the table before Me regularly.
You will make the lampstand of pure gold; of a stiff shell shall you make the lampstand, its stem and its tube; its cones, its spheres and its buds shall come out from it.
Six tubes shall come forth from its sides, three tubes of the lampstand from its one side and three tubes of the lampstand from its second side.
Three almond shaped cones shall be on the one tube, a sphere and a bud, and three almond shaped cones on the other tube, a sphere and a bud: thus for the six tubes coming forth from the lampstand;
on the lampstand itself four almond shaped cones, its spheres and its buds;
and a sphere under two of the tubes from it, and a sphere under two of the tubes from it, and a sphere under two of the tubes from it, so for the six tubes coming forth from the lampstand.
Their spheres and their tubes shall be of one piece with it, all of it of one stiff shell of pure gold.
You will make its seven lamps, and one will set up its lamps, so that it gives light over across its face.
Its snuffers and its fire-pans shall be of pure gold;
of a talent of pure gold shall you make it with all these furnishings.
And see that you make it by their model which is being shown you on the mount.
The tabernacle you shall make with ten sheets of corded cambric and blue, purple and double-dipped crimson; with cherubim in the handiwork of a designer shall you make them.
The length of one sheet shall be twenty-eight cubits and the width four cubits for one sheet; one measure shall be for all the sheets.
Five of the sheets shall be joining each to its fellow, and the five other sheets shall be joining each to its fellow.
You will make loops of blue on the hem of the one sheet from the end of the joining, and so shall you make in the hem of the endmost sheet at the second joining.
Fifty loops shall you make in the one sheet, and fifty loops shall you make in the end of the sheet which shall be at the second joining, causing the loops to receive each to its fellow.
Then you will make fifty links of gold, and join the sheets, each to its fellow, by the links; and the tabernacle will come to be one.
You will make sheets of goats' hair for the tent over the tabernacle; eleven sheets shall you make them.
The length of one sheet shall be thirty cubits and the width four cubits for one sheet, one measure for the eleven sheets.
You will join five of the sheets by themselves alone and six of the sheets by themselves alone; and you will double the sixth sheet on the forefront face of the tent.
You will make fifty loops on the hem of the one endmost sheet at the joining, and fifty loops on the hem of the sheet at the second joining.
You will make fifty copper links and insert the links into the loops and join the tent so that it will come to be one.
The extending superfluity of the sheets of the tent, the half sheet superfluity, shall extend over the back of the tabernacle.
The cubit hence and the cubit thence in the superfluity in the length of the sheets of the tent shall come to be extended over the sides of the tabernacle hence and thence to cover it.
Then you will make a cover for the tent of reddened rams' hides, and a cover of azure hides above.
You will make the hollow tapers for the tabernacle of standing acacia boards;
ten cubits shall be the length of one hollow taper, and a cubit and a half cubit the width of one hollow taper.
Two sloping side boards shall there be to one hollow taper, being projected each to its fellow: thus shall you do for all the hollow tapers of the tabernacle.
You will make the hollow tapers for the tabernacle, twenty hollow tapers for the edge toward the Negev, southward;
and forty sockets of silver shall you make under the twenty hollow tapers, two sockets under one hollow taper for its two sloping side boards, and two sockets under another hollow taper for its two sloping side boards.
Also for the second angle wall of the tabernacle for the north edge you shall make twenty hollow tapers,
with their forty sockets of silver, two sockets under one hollow taper, and two sockets under another hollow taper.
Yet for the flanks of the tabernacle seaward shall you make six hollow tapers;
And two hollow tapers shall you make for the cutout corners of the tabernacle, in the flanks.
Then couplings shall come to be below, and they shall come to be coupled together on its top by one ring. Thus shall it come to be for the two of them, for the two cutout corners shall they come to be.
There will come to be eight hollow tapers and their silver sockets, sixteen sockets, two sockets under one hollow taper, and two sockets under another hollow taper.
You will make bars of acacia wood, five for the hollow tapers of one angle wall of the tabernacle,
five bars for the hollow tapers of the second angle wall of the tabernacle, and five bars for the hollow tapers of the angle wall for the flanks of the tabernacle seaward;
and the middle bar in the midst of the hollow tapers reaching from end to end.
The hollow tapers shall you overlay with gold; and their rings shall you make of gold, as housings for the bars, and you will overlay the bars with gold.
Then you will set up the tabernacle according to its custom which you are shown on the mount.
You will make a curtain of blue, purple, double-dipped crimson and corded cambric; in the handiwork of a designer shall you make it with cherubim.
You will put it on four columns of acacia overlaid with gold, with their hooks of gold, on four sockets of silver;
and you will put the curtain under the links. Then you will bring there, inside the curtain, the coffer of the testimony. The curtain will separate for you between the holy place and the holy of holies;
and you will put the propitiatory shelter on the coffer of the testimony in the holy of holies.
Yet you will place the table outside the curtain, and the lampstand opposite the table at the angle wall of the tabernacle southward; the table you shall put at the north angle wall.
You will make a portiere for the portal of the tent of blue, purple, double-dipped crimson and corded cambric, a handiwork of embroidery.
You will make for the portiere five columns of acacia, and overlay them with gold, and their hooks with gold; and you will cast for them five sockets of copper.
You will make the altar of acacia boards, five cubits the length and five cubits the width. The altar shall come to be square, and its rise shall be three cubits.
You will make its horns on its four corners; its horns shall be of one piece with it; and you will overlay it with copper.
You will make its pots for its greasy ash, and its shovels, its sprinkling bowls, its flesh-hooks, and its fire-pans; all its furnishings shall you make of copper.
You will make it for a grate, a handiwork of copper net, and make on the net four rings of copper on its four ends.
You will put it beneath the encompassment of the altar from below so that the net comes as far as halfway up the altar.
You will make poles for the altar, poles of acacia wood, and overlay them with copper.
Then you will insert its poles in the rings, and the poles will come to be on the two angle walls of the altar when carrying it.
Hollow, of planks, shall you make it; just as one shows you on the mount, so shall they do.
You will make the court of the tabernacle: for the edge of the Negev southward the slung-sheets for the court shall be of corded cambric, a hundred cubits length for the one edge,
with its twenty columns and their twenty copper sockets, the hooks of the columns and their connections of silver;
and so for the north edge, in the length of the court the slung-sheets shall be a hundred cubits long with its twenty columns and their twenty copper sockets, the hooks of the columns and their connections of silver.
For the width of the court for the seaward edge, the slung-sheets shall be fifty cubits with their ten columns and their ten sockets.
The width of the court for the eastward edge toward the sunrise shall be fifty cubits.
Fifteen cubits of slung-sheets shall be for one flank, with their three columns and their three sockets,
and for the second flank fifteen cubits of slung-sheets with their three columns and their three sockets.
For the gate of the court shall be a portiere of twenty cubits of blue, purple, double-dipped crimson and corded cambric, a handiwork of embroidery with their four columns and their four sockets.
On all the columns around the court the connections shall be of silver, their hooks of silver, and their sockets of copper.
The length of the court shall be a hundred cubits, and the width fifty by fifty, and its rise five cubits, of corded cambric, and their copper sockets.
All the furnishings of the tabernacle for all its service and all its pegs, and all the pegs of the court shall be of copper.
As for you, you shall instruct the sons of Israel that they shall take to you pure olive oil, pounded, for the luminary, to kindle the lamp regularly.
In the tent of appointment, outside of the curtain which shall be over the testimony, Aaron and his sons shall arrange it from evening until morning before YHVH. It shall be an eonian statute throughout their generations, for the sons of Israel.
You, bring near to you Aaron, your brother, and his sons with him, from the midst of the sons of Israel, to serve as priests for Me; Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, sons of Aaron.
You will make holy garments for Aaron, your brother, for glory and for beauty;
and you shall speak to all the wise of heart, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they make the garments of Aaron to hallow him to serve as priest for Me.
These are the garments which they shall make: a breastplate, a vestment, a robe, a tunic with mounts, a turban and a sash. They will make holy garments for Aaron, your brother, and for his sons, to serve as priests for Me.
They shall take the gold, the blue, the purple, the double-dipped crimson and the cambric.
They will make the vestment of gold, blue purple, double-dipped crimson and corded cambric, the handiwork of a designer.
Two joining shoulderpieces shall be for it, on both its ends where it is made to join.
And the designed band of his vestment which shall be on it, shall be like its handiwork of one piece with it, of gold, blue, purple, double-dipped crimson and corded cambric.
Then you will take two onyx stones and engrave on them the names of the sons of Israel,
six of their names on the one stone and the six names left, on the second stone, according to their genealogical annals.
With the handiwork of lapidary, as the engravings of a seal, shall you engrave the two stones with the names of the sons of Israel. You shall make them set round about with mountings of gold filigree.
Then you will place the two stones on the shoulderpieces of the vestment as memorial stones for the sons of Israel, and Aaron will bear their names before YHVH on his two shoulderpieces as a reminder.
You will make the mountings of gold filigree,
with two braids of pure gold; you shall make them to be boundaries, a handiwork of rope, and you will put the braided ropes on the mountings.
You will make the breastplate of judgment, the handiwork of a designer; like the handiwork of the vestment shall you make it; of gold, blue, purple, double-dipped crimson and corded cambric shall you make it.
Squared shall it come to be when doubled, a span its length and a span its width.
You will fill it with a filling of stone, four rows of stones: a row of carnelian, peridot and emerald, one row,
and the second row of carbuncle, sapphire and diamond,
and the third row of jacinth, agate and amethyst,
and the fourth row of topaz, onyx and jasper. Mounted in gold filigree, shall they be in their fillings.
The stones shall come to be twelve with their names according to the names of the sons of Israel; as the engravings of a seal, each with its name, shall they come to be for the twelve tribes.
You will make on the breastplate boundaries of braid, a handiwork of rope, of pure gold.
You will make two rings of gold on the breastplate and put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.
You will put the two ropes of gold on the two rings at the ends of the breastplate;
and the two ends of the two ropes you shall put on the two mountings, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the vestment to its forefront view.
You will make two rings of gold and place them on the two ends of the breastplate, on its hem which shall be across the vestment, inside.
You will make two rings of gold and put them on the two shoulderpieces of the vestment below its forefront view, to correspond with its joining above to the designed band of the vestment.
Then they shall lace the breastplate by its rings to the rings of the vestment with blue twine, to come to be over the designed band of the vestment, so that the breastplate not be displaced from the vestment.
Thus Aaron will bear the names of the sons of Israel in the breastplate of judgment over his heart as a continual reminder before YHVH when he enters into the holy place.
You will put the Urim and the Thummim into the breastplate of judgment, and they will come to be on Aaron's heart when he enters before YHVH. Thus Aaron will bear the judgment of the sons of Israel on his heart before YHVH continually.
You will make the robe of the vestment wholly of blue;
and there will come to be a slit for his head in its midst. A hem shall be around its slit, a handiwork of a weaver; as the slit of a coat of mail shall it be to it, so that it not be torn.
Then on its skirts you will make pomegranates of blue, purple, double-dipped crimson and corded cambric on its skirts round about, and bells of gold in their midst round about,
a bell of gold and a pomegranate, a bell of gold and a pomegranate, on the skirt of the robe round about.
Thus it will come to be on Aaron for ministering; and its sound will be heard when he enters into the holy place before YHVH, and when he goes forth, so that he should not die.
You will make a blossom of pure gold and engrave on it like engravings of a seal: Holy to YHVH.
You will place it on blue twine, and it will come to be on the turban; on the forefront of the face of the turban shall it come to be.
It will come to be on the forehead of Aaron; thus Aaron will bear the depravity of the holy things which the sons of Israel shall sanctify for all their holy gifts; and it will come to be on his forehead continually for their acceptance before YHVH.
You will mount the tunic in cambric, and you will make a turban of cambric, and a sash shall you make, a handiwork of embroidery.
Also you shall make tunics for the sons of Aaron. Then you will make sashes for them, and you shall make caps for them, for glory and for beauty.
You will put them on Aaron, your brother, and his sons with him, and you will anoint them. You will fill their hands and hallow them, and they will serve as priests for Me.
Make for them linen breeches to cover the maked flesh. From the waists and unto the thighs shall they come to be;
and they will come to be on Aaron and on his sons when they enter into the tent of appointment or when they come close to the altar to minister in the holy place, so that they may not bear depravity, and should die. It is an eonian statute for him and for his seed after him.
This is the thing that you shall do to them to hallow them to serve as priests for Me. Take one young bull calf of the herd and two flawless rams,
unleavened bread and unleavened perforated cakes mingled with oil and unleavened wafers anointed with oil; of wheat flour shall you make them.
You will put them on one tray and bring them near in the tray, with the young bull and the two rams.
Then you shall bring Aaron and his sons near to the portal of the tent of appointment, and wash them in water.
You will take the garments and put on Aaron the tunic and the robe of the vestment and the vestment and the breastplate, and you will invest him with the designed band of the vestment.
You will place the turban on his head and put the holy insignia on the turban.
Also you will take the anointing oil and pour it on his head and anoint him.
And you shall bring his sons near and put tunics on them.
Then you will gird them with sashes, Aaron and his sons, and bind up caps on them, so that the priesthood comes to be theirs for an eonian statute when you have filled the hand of Aaron and the hands of his sons:
You will bring the young bull near before the tent of appointment, and Aaron and his sons will support their hands on the head of the young bull.
You will slay the young bull before YHVH at the portal of the tent of appointment,
take some of the blood of the young bull and put it on the horns of the altar with your finger. And you shall pour out all the rest of the blood at the foundation of the altar.
Then you will take all the fat covering the inwards and the redundance above the liver and the two kidneys and the fat which is on them, and you will cause them to fume on the altar.
Yet the flesh of the young bull and its hide and its dung shall you burn with fire outside the camp. A sin offering is it.
You shall take one ram, and Aaron and his sons shall support their hands on the head of the ram.
You will slay the ram, take its blood and sprinkle it on the altar round about.
You shall piece the ram into its pieces, wash its inwards and its shanks and put them on its pieces and on its head.
Then you will cause all the ram to fume on the altar. An ascent offering is it to YHVH. It is a fragrant odor, a fire offering to YHVH.
Then you will take the second ram, and Aaron and his sons will support their hands on the head of the ram.
You will slay the ram, take some of its blood and put it on the lobe of Aaron's right ear and on the lobes of the right ears of his sons and on the thumbs of their right hands and on the big toes of their right feet; and you will sprinkle the blood on the altar round about.
Then you will take some of the blood which is on the altar and some of the anointing oil and splatter it on Aaron and on his garments and on his sons and on the garments of his sons with him, so that he will be holy, he and his garments, and his sons and the garments of his sons with him.
You will take from the ram the fat: the fat tail and the fat covering the inwards and the redundance above the liver and the two kidneys and the fat which is on them and the right leg (for it is a ram of consecrations),
and one cake of bread and one perforated cake of oiled bread and one wafer from the tray of unleavened bread which is before YHVH.
You will place the whole on the palms of Aaron and on the palms of his sons and wave them for a wave offering before YHVH.
Then you will take them from their hands and cause them to fume on the altar on top of the ascent offering for a fragrant odor before YHVH. It is a fire offering to YHVH.
You will take the chest of the ram of consecrations which is for Aaron and wave it as a wave offering before YHVH; and it will come to be your assigned share.
Then you will hallow the chest of the wave offering and the leg of the heave offering, which is waved and what is heaved from the ram of consecrations which is for Aaron and which is for his sons.
It will come to be for Aaron and for his sons as an eonian statute from the sons of Israel, for it is a heave offering. And it shall become a heave offering from the sons of Israel, from the sacrifices of their peace offerings, their heave offering to YHVH.
The holy garments which are Aaron's shall become his sons' after him, to be anointed in them and to fill their hands in them.
Seven days one of his sons, whoever is priest in his stead, he who comes into the tent of appointment to minister in the holy place, shall put them on.
The ram of consecrations shall you take and cook its flesh in a holy place;
and Aaron and his sons will eat the flesh of the ram and the bread which is in the tray at the portal of the tent of appointment.
You will eat them by which a propitiatory shelter was made to fill their hands to hallow them. Yet an alien shall not eat them, for they are holy.
And if something is left of the flesh of consecrations or of the bread until the morning then you will burn that left over with fire; it shall not be eaten, for it is holy.
You will do thus for Aaron and for his sons according to all that I have instructed you. Seven days shall you fill their hands.
A young bull as a sin offering shall you offer day by day for propitiatory shelters; you will make a sin offering on the altar when you make your propitiatory shelter on it. And you will anoint it to hallow it.
Seven days shall you make a propitiatory shelter on the altar and hallow it. Thus the altar becomes a holy of holies. All that touches the altar shall be holy.
This is what you shall offer on the altar: two he-lambs a year old day by day regularly.
The one he-lamb shall you offer in the morning, and the second he-lamb shall you offer between the evening hours,
also a tenth of an ephah of flour mingled with a quarter of a hin of pounded oil, and a libation of a quarter of a hin of wine for the one lamb.
And the second lamb you shall offer between the evening hours; as the morning approach present and as its libation shall you offer it, for a fragrant odor, a fire offering to YHVH,
a regular ascent offering throughout your generations, at the portal of the tent of appointment, before YHVH, where I shall keep appointment with you to speak to you there.
And I will keep appointment there with the sons of Israel, and it will be hallowed by My glory.
Thus I will hallow the tent of appointment and the altar; and Aaron and his sons shall I hallow to serve as priests for Me.
I will tabernacle in the midst of the sons of Israel and will become their God.
Then they will realize that I am YHVH their God Who brought them forth from the land of Egypt that I may tabernacle in their midst. I am YHVH their God.
You will make the altar for fuming incense; of acacia boards shall you make it.
A cubit shall be its length and a cubit its width. Square it shall be, and two cubits its rise. Its horns are one piece with it.
You will overlay it with pure gold, its top around its sidewalls and its horns; and you will make for it a flange of gold round about.
Two rings of gold shall you make for it. Beneath its flange, on its two angle walls shall you make them, on its two sides. And they shall be for housings for the poles, to carry it with them.
You will make the poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold;
and you will put it before the curtain which shall be by the coffer of the testimony, before the propitiatory shelter which shall be on the testimony where I shall keep appointment with you.
Aaron will cause incense of spices to fume on it morning by morning; when making good the lamps shall he cause it to fume;
and when Aaron sets up the lamps between the evening hours, he shall cause it to fume as incense regularly before YHVH throughout your generations.
You shall not set up on it an alien incense or an ascent offering or an approach present, and a libation you shall not libate on it.
Aaron will make a propitiatory shelter on its horns once in the year with the blood of the sin offering of the propitiatory shelter; once in the year shall he make a propitiatory shelter on it throughout your generations. It shall be a holy of holies to YHVH.
YHVH spoke to Moses saying:
When you take up the sum of the sons of Israel by their mustered ones then each man will give a sheltering ransom for his soul to YHVH while one is mustering them, so that no stroke may come among them when mustering them.
This shall they give, everyone passing over to the ones being mustered: a half shekel by the shekel of the holy place, which is twentieth of a gerah to the shekel; the half shekel shall be a heave offering to YHVH.
Everyone passing over to the ones being mustered from twenty years old and upward shall give YHVH's heave offering.
The rich shall not increase it, and the poor shall not decrease it from half a shekel, to give as YHVH's heave offering to shelter your souls.
You will take the sheltering ransom silver from the sons of Israel and give it to the service of the tent of appointment that it become for the sons of Israel a memorial before YHVH to shelter your souls.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
You will make a laver of copper and its post of copper, for washing, and put it between the tent of appointment and the altar, and put water therein,
that Aaron and his sons will wash their hands and their feet from it.
Whenever they enter into the tent of appointment they shall wash with water so that they should not die, or when they come close to the altar to minister, to fume incense by fire to YHVH;
then they will wash their hands and their feet so that they should not die. It will become to them an eonian statute, for him and his seed throughout their generations.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
As for you, take to yourself the principal aromatics, of free flowing myrrh five hundred shekels worth and of aromatic cinnamon half of it, two hundred fifty, and of aromatic reed two hundred fifty,
and of cassia five hundred by the shekel of the holy place, and of olive oil a hin;
and you will make of it a holy anointing oil, a compounded ointment, the handiwork of a compounder. A holy anointing oil shall it be.
With it you will anoint the tent of appointment and the coffer of the testimony,
the table and all its furnishings, the lampstand and its furnishings and the altar of incense,
the altar of ascent offering and all its furnishings, the laver and its post.
You will hallow them so that they become a holy of holies. All that touches them shall be holy.
Aaron and his sons shall you anoint and hallow them to serve as priests for Me.
And to the sons of Israel shall you speak, saying: A holy anointing oil shall this become to Me throughout your generations.
On human flesh of others it shall not be rubbed, and by its recipe you shall not make such as it. It is holy; holy shall it become to you.
The man who compounds such as it, and who gives any of it to an alien, he will be cut off from his people.
YHVH said to Moses: Take to yourself spices: stacte, murex shell and galbanum, spices with pure frankincense. Component by component shall it be;
and you will make of it an incense, a compound of the handiwork of a compounder, salted clean, holy.
Then you will reduce to powder some of it, pulverized, and put it before the testimony in the tent of appointment where I shall keep appointment with you. A holy of holies shall it become to you.
Yet the incense which you shall make by its recipe you shall not make for yourselves. Holy shall it be to you for YHVH.
The man who makes such as it to smell of it, he will be cut off from his people.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
See! I call by name Bezalel son of Uri son of Hur of the stock of Judah.
I shall fill him with the spirit of God, with wisdom and with understanding and with knowledge, in all work,
to design designs, to make them in gold, in silver and in copper,
and as a lapidary for filling and as an artificer in wood for making all kind of work.
And I, behold, I give him Aholiab son of Ahisamach of the stock of Dan. In the heart of all the wise of heart I have given wisdom, that they will make all that I have instructed you:
the tent of appointment and the coffer for the testimony with the propitiatory shelter which shall be on it and all the furnishings of the tent,
the table with its furnishings, the pure lampstand with all its furnishings and the altar of incense,
the altar of ascent offering with all its furnishings, the laver and its post;
also the colored garments and the holy garments for Aaron, the priest, and the garments of his sons to serve as priests;
then the anointing oil and the incense of spices for the holy place; according to all that I have instructed you shall they do.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Now you, speak to the sons of Israel saying, Surely, My sabbaths shall you keep, for it is a sign between Me and you throughout your generations to know that I, YHVH, am hallowing you.
Hence you will keep the sabbath, for it is holy to you. Profaners of it shall be put to death, yea death, for if anyone is doing work in it, that soul will be cut off from among his people.
Six days shall work be done, and on the seventh day is a sabbath of cessation, holy to YHVH. Everyone doing work on the sabbath day shall be put to death, yea death.
Hence the sons of Israel will keep the sabbath so as to make the sabbath an eonian covenant throughout their generations.
Between Me and the sons of Israel it shall be a sign for the eon, for in six days YHVH dealt with the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh day He ceased and was refreshed.
He gave to Moses, as He finished speaking with him on Mount Sinai, two tablets of the testimony, tablets of stone, written with the finger of God.
The people saw that Moses was tardy to descend from the mountain. So the people assembled themselves against Aaron and said to him: Rise! Make for us God who shall go before us, for this Moses, the man who brought us up from the land of Egypt, we know not what has become of him.
Then Aaron said to them: Tear off the pendants of gold which are in the ears of your wives, your sons and your daughters, and bring them to me.
So all the people tore off the pendants of gold which were in their ears and brought them to Aaron.
He took it from their hands and formed it with a stylus and made of it a molten calf. And they said: These are your God, Israel, who brought you up from the land of Egypt.
When Aaron discerned this, he built an altar before it. Then Aaron called out and said: A celebration to YHVH tomorrow!
So they rose early on the morrow and brought up ascent offerings and brought close peace offerings. And the people sat to eat and drank and rose to make fun.
Then YHVH spoke to Moses: Go! Go down, for your people whom you brought up from the land of Egypt have corrupted themselves.
They have withdrawn quickly from the way I instructed them. They have made for themselves a molten calf and bowed themselves down to it. They have sacrificed to it and said: These are your God, Israel, who brought you up from the land of Egypt.
And YHVH said to Moses: I have seen this people, and behold, they are a stiff-necked people.
And now, leave it to Me, that My anger may grow hot against them, so that I may finish them; and I shall make you into a great nation.
Then Moses beseeched the face of YHVH his God and said: Why, YHVH, has Your anger grown hot against Your people whom You have brought forth from the land of Egypt with great vigor and with a steadfast hand?
Why should the Egyptians speak, saying: For evil He brings them forth to kill them in the mountains and to finish them off the surface of the ground? Turn back from the heat of Your anger and show mercy concerning the evil to Your people.
Remember Abraham, Isaac and Israel, Your servants to whom You swore by Yourself. You spoke to them, saying: I shall increase your seed as the stars of the heavens, and all this land, as I have said, I shall give it to your seed, and they will gain it as an allotment for the eon.
So YHVH showed mercy concerning the evil which He spoke of doing to His people.
Then Moses turned around and descended from the mountain with the two tablets of the testimony in his hands, tablets written on two sides across them, on this and on that side were they written.
And the tables, they were the handiwork of God; and the writing, it was the writing of God, chiseled on the tablets.
When Joshua heard the voice of the people in their shouting, he said to Moses: The sound of battle is in the camp.
Yet he said: There is no sound of the response of mastery, and there is no sound of the response of defeat; the sound of responsive singing I hear.
And it came to be just as he drew near to the camp and saw the calf and the choruses that Moses' anger grew hot, and he flung from his hands the tablets and broke them below the mountain.
Then he took the calf which they had made, burned it with fire and ground it until it was pulverized; he winnowed it upon the surface of the water and made the sons of Israel drink it.
Moses said to Aaron: What has this people done to you that you have brought on them a great sin?
And Aaron said: The anger of my lord must not grow hot. You know the people that they are unbridled,
for they said to me: Make God for us who shall go before us, for this Moses, the man who brought us up from the land of Egypt, we know not what has become of him.
And I said to them: Anyone who has gold tear it off yourself. So they gave it to me, and I flung it into the fire, and this calf came forth.
When Moses saw the people that they were unbridled, that Aaron had let them become unbridled unto disrepute among those rising against them,
then Moses stood in the gate of the camp and said: Whoever is for YHVH come to me! So all the sons of Levi gathered themselves to him;
and he said to them: Thus says YHVH God of Israel: Each man place his sword on his thigh, cross over and return from gate to gate in the camp. Each man kill his brother and each man his associate and each man his nearest.
The sons of Levi did according to the word of Moses, and there fell of the people in that day about three thousand men.
Hence Moses said: They have filled your hands today to YHVH, for each man has been against his son and against his brother so as to give a blessing over you today.
It came to be after the morrow that Moses said to the people: You have sinned a great sin, and now I am going up to YHVH. Perhaps I may make a propitiatory shelter about your sin.
So Moses returned to YHVH and said: Oh! this people has sinned a great sin, and they made for themselves an God of gold.
And now, if You should bear their sin, bear it. Yet if not, wipe me, I pray, from Your scroll which You have written.
YHVH said to Moses: Anyone who has sinned against Me, I shall wipe him from My scroll.
And now, go, guide the people to the place of which I spoke to you. Behold, My messenger shall go before you, and in the day of My visitation, then I will visit on them their sin.
Then YHVH struck the people down because they had used the calf which Aaron made.
YHVH spoke to Moses: Go up hence, you and the people whom you brought up from the land of Egypt, to the land about which I swore to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob, saying: To your seed shall I give it.
And I will send before you My messenger. I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Hivite and the Jebusite.
And I shall bring you into a land gushing with milk and honey. For I shall not go up among you, for you are a stiff-necked people, lest I should finish you on the way.
When the people heard this evil word, they mourned, and no man set his ornaments on him;
for YHVH had said to Moses: Say to the sons of Israel: You stiff-necked people! If for one moment I should go up among you, I would finish you! And now, take down your ornaments off you that I may know what I should do to you.
So the sons of Israel despoiled themselves of their own ornaments from Mount Horeb onward.
As for Moses, he took the tent and stretched it out outside the camp, far from the camp; and he called it the tent of appointment; and it came to be that everyone seeking YHVH went forth to the tent of appointment which was outside the camp.
Also it came to be as Moses went forth to the tent, all the people rose and stationed themselves, each man, at the portal of his tent and looked after Moses until he entered the tent.
It came to be as Moses entered the tent that the cloud column descended and stood at the portal of the tent, and He spoke with Moses.
When all the people saw the cloud column standing at the portal of the tent, all the people rose and bowed themselves down, each man at the portal of his tent.
So YHVH spoke to Moses face to face, just as a man speaks to his associate. When he returned to the camp then his minister, Joshua son of Nun, a youth, did not remove himself from the midst of the tent.
Moses said to YHVH: See! You are saying to me: Bring up this people, but You have not let me know whom You shall send with me. Yet You have said: I know you by name, and moreover you have found grace in My eyes.
And now, I pray, if I have found grace in Your eyes let me know I pray, Your way that I may know You and that I may find grace in Your eyes; see that this nation is Your people.
And He said: My presence, shall it go that I may give rest to you?
So he said to him: If Your presence is not going, do not bring us up hence!
Whereby shall it be known, indeed, that I find grace in Your eyes, I and Your people? Is it not by Your going with us that we may be distinguished, I and Your people, from all the peoples who are on the surface of the ground?
YHVH said to Moses: Moreover, this matter of which you have spoken I shall do, for you find grace in My eyes, and I know you by name.
Now he said: Show me, I pray, Your glory.
And He said: I shall pass all My goodness before you and proclaim My name, YHVH, before you; I will be gracious to whom I am being gracious and will have compassion for whom I am having compassion.
He also said: You cannot see My face, for no human shall see Me and live.
Then YHVH said: Behold! There is a place by Me, and you will station yourself on the rock.
So it will come to be when My glory passes by that I will place you in a fissure of the rock. And I will overshadow you with My palm until I pass by.
Then I will take away My palm, and you will see My back, yet My face shall not appear.
YHVH said to Moses: Carve for yourself two stone tablets like the first ones, and I will write on the tablets the words which came to be on the first tablets which you broke.
Be ready tomorrow morning, and you will ascend in the morning to Mount Sinai and station yourself for Me there on the summit of the mountain.
No man shall ascend with you; indeed, let no man be seen in all the mountain. Moreover, the flock and the herd must not be grazing toward that mountain.
So he carved two stone tablets like the first ones. And Moses rose early in the morning and ascended to Mount Sinai, just as YHVH had instructed him and took in his hands the two stone tablets.
Then YHVH descended in a cloud and stationed Himself with him there; and he called the name of YHVH.
Now YHVH passed by before his face and called: YHVH, YHVH El, Who is compassionate and gracious, slow to anger and with much kindness and truth,
preserving kindness to thousands, bearing with depravity, transgression and sin, yet He is not immediately making innocent in order to make innocent, but visiting the depravity of the fathers on the sons and on the sons' sons, on the third and on the fourth generation.
Then Moses hastened, bowed his head toward the earth, bowed himself down,
and said: I pray, if I find grace in Your eyes, my Lord, I pray, let my Lord go among us, for they are a stiff-necked people, and You will pardon our depravity and our sins, and You will gain us an allotment.
Then He said: Behold, I am contracting a covenant; in front of all your people shall I do marvels which have not been created on the entire earth, or among any of the nations. So all the people among whom you are will see the handiwork of YHVH, for fear inspiring is that which I am doing with you.
Observe for yourself what I am instructing you today. Behold Me driving out from your presence the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Hivite and the Jebusite.
Guard yourself lest you contract a covenant with the dwellers of the land, to which you are entering, lest it become a trap among you.
For their altars shall you break down, and their monuments shall you break, and their Asherah poles shall you cut down.
For you shall not bow yourself down to another el (for YHVH, Jealous is His name; He is a jealous El)
lest you contract a covenant with the dweller of the land when they prostitute after their God and sacrifice to their God lest one call to you that you eat of his sacrifice.
If you would take of his daughters for your sons and give your daughters to their sons, then his daughters would prostitute after their God and cause your sons to prostitute after their God.
Molten God you shall not make for yourself.
The celebration of unleavened cakes shall you observe seven days. You shall eat unleavened cakes just as I have instructed you for the appointed time in the month of Aviv, for in the month of Aviv you came forth from Egypt.
Everyone opening up the womb is Mine, everyone of your make cattle, the one opening up of the kine and of the flockling.
Yet the male opening up of a donkey you shall ransom with a flockling, and if you should not ransom it then you will break its neck. Every firstborn of your sons you shall ransom. And none shall appear before Me empty-handed.
Six days shall you serve, and in the seventh day you shall cease; in plowing time and in harvest shall you cease.
The celebration of weeks shall you observe for yourself, the firstfruits of the wheat harvest and the celebration of the ingathering at the revolution of the year.
Three times in the year shall every male of yours appear before the Lord YHVH, God of Israel.
For I shall evict nations from your presence and widen your boundary. No man shall covet your land when you go up to appear before YHVH your God three times in the year.
You shall not slay the blood of My sacrifice with what is leavened, nor shall the sacrifice of the passover celebration lodge unto the morning.
The first of the firstfruits of your ground shall you bring to the house of YHVH your God. You shall not cook a kid in the milk of its mother.
YHVH said to Moses: Write for yourself these words, for at the bidding of these words I contract with you a covenant and with Israel.
And he came to be there before YHVH, forty days and forty nights. Bread he did not eat and water he did not drink. Thus he wrote on the tablets the words of the covenant, the ten words.
It came to be when Moses descended from Mount Sinai with the two tablets of testimony in Moses' hands, when he descended from the mount, that Moses did not realize that the skin of his face gleamed because of His speaking to him.
Then Aaron and all the sons of Israel saw Moses, and behold, the skin of his face gleamed. So they feared to come close to him.
Yet Moses called to them, and Aaron and all the princes in the congregation returned to him, and Moses spoke to them.
Afterward all the sons of Israel came close to him; and he instructed them in all that YHVH had spoken with him on Mount Sinai.
When Moses finished speaking with them, then he put a covering on his face.
Yet whenever Moses entered before YHVH to speak with Him he took away the covering until he went forth. When he came forth, then he spoke to the sons of Israel that which he was instructed.
And the sons of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses's face gleamed. Yet Moses restored the covering on his face until he entered to speak with Him.
Then Moses assembled the whole congregation of the sons of Israel and said to them: These are the words which YHVH instructs you to do them.
Six days shall work be done, yet on the seventh day you shall come to have a holy sabbath of cessation to YHVH. Everyone doing work on it shall be put to death.
You shall not eradicate fire in all your dwellings on the sabbath day.
Thus Moses spoke to the whole congregation of the sons of Israel saying: This is the word which YHVH instructs, saying,
take a heave offering to YHVH from what you have. Everyone willing is his heart shall bring YHVH's heave offering: gold, silver and copper,
blue, purple and double-dipped crimson, cambric and goats' hair,
reddened rams' hides and azure hides and acacia wood,
oil for the luminary and aromatics for the anointing oil and for the incense of spices,
stones of onyx and stones for fillings for the vestment and for the breastplate.
Everyone wise of heart among you shall come and make all that YHVH has instructed:
the tabernacle, its tent and its cover, its links and its hollow tapers, its bars, its columns and its sockets,
the coffer and its poles, the propitiatory shelter and the portiere curtain;
the table, its poles, all its furnishings and the bread of the presence;
the lampstand of the luminary, all its furnishings, its lamps and the oil for the luminary;
the altar of incense and its poles, the anointing oil and the incense of spices; the opening portiere for the portal of the tabernacle;
the altar of ascent offering and the copper grate which is for it, its poles and all its furnishings, the laver and its post;
the slung-sheets of the court, its columns, its sockets and the portiere of the gate of the court;
the pegs of the tabernacle, the pegs of the court and their cords;
the colored garments to minister in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons to serve as priests.
Now the whole congregation of the sons of Israel went forth from before Moses;
then every man whose heart prompted him entered, and everyone whose spirit made him willing brought YHVH's heave offering for the work of the tent of appointment and for all its service and for the holy garments.
The men entered along with their wives, all with a willing heart. They brought clasps and pendants and rings and plaited ornaments, every article of gold. So did every man who would wave a wave offering of gold to YHVH.
And every man with whom was found blue, purple and double dipped crimson, cambric and goats' hair, reddened rams' hides and azure hides, they brought them.
All raising up a heave offering of silver and copper brought YHVH's heave offering. All with whom was found acacia wood for all the work of the service, they brought it.
Every woman wise of heart spun with her hands, and they brought the spinning, the blue, the purple, the double-dipped crimson and the cambric.
All the wives whose heart prompted them with wisdom spun the goats' hair.
The princes, they brought the onyx stones and the filling stones for the vestment and for the breastplate,
also the aromatics and the oil for the luminary and for the anointing oil and for the incense of spices.
Every man and woman whose heart made them willing to bring for all the work which YHVH had instructed to do by the hand of Moses, the sons of Israel brought as a voluntary offering to YHVH.
Moses said to the sons of Israel: See! YHVH has called by name Bezalel son of Uri son of Hur, of the stock of Judah;
and He is filling him with the spirit of God, with wisdom, with understanding, with knowledge and with all workmanship
even to design designs, for work in gold, in silver and in copper,
and as a lapidary for filling and as an artificer in wood for work with all workmanship of designs.
And the ability to direct He put into his heart, for him and Aholiab son of Ahisamach, of the stock of Dan.
He filled them with wisdom of heart to do all the work of the artificer and brocade designer and embroiderer in blue, in purple, in double-dipped crimson and in cambric and weaving, executors of all work and designers of designs.
So Bezalel and Aholiab will work, and every man wise of heart in whom YHVH put wisdom and understanding, to know how to do all the work of the service of the holy place according to all that YHVH had instructed.
Then Moses called to Bezalel and to Aholiab and to every man wise of heart, to whom YHVH had given wisdom in his heart, everyone whose heart prompted him to come near to the work to do it.
So they took from before Moses the entire heave offering which the sons of Israel brought for the work of the service of the holy place, to do it. And still they brought to him voluntary offerings morning by morning.
Then all the wise came, the ones doing all the work of the holy place, man by man, from his work which they were doing.
And they spoke to Moses, saying: The people have brought more than sufficient for the service of the work which YHVH had instructed to do it.
So Moses instructed, and they caused a voice to pass in the camp, saying: Let not man or woman do further work for the heave offering of the holy place. Thus the people were forbidden to bring more,
since the work brought came to be sufficient for them for the entire work, to do it and to have reserve.
Then all the wise of heart among those doing the work made the tabernacle with ten sheets of corded cambric and blue, purple and double-dipped crimson; with cherubim, the handiwork of a designer, he made them.
The length of one sheet was twenty-eight cubits and the width four cubits for one sheet. One measure was for all the sheets.
And he joined five of the sheets one to another, and the five other sheets he joined one to another.
He made loops of blue on the hem of the one sheet at the end at the joining, and so he made in the hem of the endmost sheet at the second joining.
Fifty loops he made in one sheet, and fifty loops he made in the end of the sheet which was at the second joining, causing the loops to receive one to another.
And he made fifty links of gold and joined the sheets one to another by the links, and the tabernacle came to be one.
Then he made sheets of goats' hair for the tent over the tabernacle. Eleven sheets he made them.
The length of one sheet was thirty cubits, and four cubits was the width of one sheet, one measure for the eleven sheets.
And he joined five of the sheets by themselves alone and six of the sheets by themselves alone.
Then he made fifty loops on the hem of the endmost sheet at the joining, and he made fifty loops on the hem of the sheet at the second joining.
And he made fifty copper links to join the tent, for it to come to be one.
He also made a cover for the tent of reddened rams' hides, and a cover of azure hides above.
Then he made the hollow tapers for the tabernacle of standing acacia boards;
ten cubits was the length of one hollow taper, and a cubit and a half cubit the width of one hollow taper.
There were two sloping side boards to one hollow taper being projected one to another: thus he did for all the hollow tapers of the tabernacle.
And he made the hollow tapers for the tabernacle, twenty hollow tapers for the edge of the Negev southward;
and forty sockets of silver he made under the twenty hollow tapers, two sockets under one hollow taper for its two sloping side boards, and two sockets under another hollow taper for its two sloping side boards.
Also for the second angle wall of the tabernacle for the north edge he made twenty hollow tapers,
with their forty sockets of silver, two sockets under one hollow taper and two sockets under another hollow taper.
Yet for the flanks of the tabernacle seaward he made six hollow tapers;
and two hollow tapers he made for the cutout corners of the tabernacle, in the flanks.
Then couplings came to be below, and they came to be coupled together to its top by the first ring. Thus he did for the two of them, for the two cutout corners.
There came to be eight hollow tapers and their silver sockets, sixteen sockets, two sockets for each, two sockets under one hollow taper.
Then he made bars of acacia wood, five for the hollow tapers of one angle wall of the tabernacle,
also five bars for the hollow tapers of the second angle wall of the tabernacle and five bars for the hollow tapers of the tabernacle for the flanks seaward;
and he made the middle bar in the midst of the hollow tapers to reach from end to end.
The hollow tapers he overlaid with gold; and their rings he made of gold, as housings for the bars, and he overlaid the bars with gold.
He made the curtain of blue, purple, double-dipped crimson and corded cambric; the handiwork of a designer of cherubim he made it.
He made for it four columns of acacia, and he overlaid them with gold, with their hooks of gold; and he cast for them four sockets of silver.
Then he made a portiere for the portal of the tent of blue, purple, double-dipped crimson and corded cambric; the handiwork of an embroiderer.
As for its five columns and their hooks, he overlaid their heads and their connections with gold; and their five sockets were of copper.
Bezalel made the coffer of acacia boards, two cubits and a half its length and a cubit and a half its width and a cubit and a half its rise.
He overlaid it with pure gold inside and outside and made for it a flange of gold round about.
He cast four rings of gold for it on its four footings with two rings on its one angle wall and two rings on its second angle wall.
Then he made poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold;
and he inserted the poles in the rings on the angle walls of the coffer to carry the coffer.
He also made the propitiatory shelter of pure gold, two cubits and a half its length and a cubit and a half its width.
Then he made two cherubim of gold; he hammered them a stiff shell of one piece with the two ends of the propitiatory shelter,
one cherub from this end and one cherub from that end. From the propitiatory shelter he made the cherubim of one piece with its two ends.
The cherubim came to be with spreading wings above, overshadowing with their wings over the propitiatory shelter with their faces each to his fellow. Toward the propitiatory shelter the faces of the cherubim came to be.
Then he made the table of acacia boards, two cubits its length and a cubit its width and a cubit and a half its rise.
He overlaid it with pure gold and made for it a flange of gold round about.
He also made for it a border of a handbreadth round about and made a flange of gold for its border round about.
Then he cast for it four rings of gold and put the rings on the four edges which were for its four feet.
The rings came to correspond with the border, housings for the poles to carry the table.
He made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold to carry the table.
He also made the furnishings which were on the table, its dishes, its spoons, its waste pans and the chalices with which libations were made, of pure gold.
Then he made the lampstand of pure gold; of a stiff shell he made the lampstand, its stem and its tube; its cones, its spheres and its buds were of one piece with it.
And six tubes came forth from its sides, three tubes of the lampstand from one of its sides and three tubes of the lampstand from its second side.
Three almond shaped cones were on the one tube, a sphere and a bud, and three almond shaped cones on the other tube, a sphere and a bud: thus for the six tubes coming forth from the lampstand.
On the lampstand were four almond shaped cones, its spheres and its buds,
and a sphere under two of the tubes from it, and a sphere under two of the tubes from it, and a sphere under two of the tubes from it, for the six tubes coming forth from the lampstand.
Their spheres and their tubes were of one piece with it, all of it of one stiff shell of pure gold.
He also made its seven lamps and its snuffers and its fire-pans of pure gold;
of a talent of pure gold he made it and all its furnishings.
Then he made the incense altar of acacia boards, a cubit its length and a cubit its width. It was square, and its rise was two cubits. Its horns were of one piece with it.
He overlaid it with pure gold, its top and around its sidewalls and its horns, and made for it a flange of gold round about.
Two rings of gold he made for it beneath its flange on its two angle walls on its two sides for housings for the poles, to carry it with them.
He made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold.
He also made the holy anointing oil and the incense of pure spices, the handiwork of a compounder.
Then he made the altar of ascent offering of acacia boards, five cubits its length and five cubits its width. It was square, and its rise was three cubits.
He made its horns on its four corners; its horns were of one piece with it. And he overlaid it with copper.
He also made all the furnishings of the altar, the pots and the shovels and the sprinkling bowls, the flesh-hooks and the fire-pans; all its furnishings he made of copper.
He made for the altar a grate, a handiwork of a copper net, beneath its encompassment from below unto its middle.
And he cast four rings on the four ends of the copper grate as housings for the poles.
He made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with copper.
And he inserted the poles in the rings on the angle walls of the altar to carry it with them. Hollow, of planks he made it.
Then he made the laver of copper and its post of copper, from the mirrors of the women stationed for service who enlisted at the portal of the tent of appointment.
Then he made the court: for the edge of the Negev southward the slung-sheets of the court were of corded cambric, a hundred cubits,
with their twenty columns and their twenty sockets of copper, the hooks of the columns and their connections of silver;
and for the north edge a hundred cubits, with their twenty columns and their twenty sockets of copper, the hooks of the columns and their connections of silver.
For the seaward edge, the slung-sheets were fifty cubits with their ten columns and their ten sockets, the hooks of the columns and their connections of silver;
and for the eastward edge toward the sunrise, fifty cubits.
Slung-sheets of fifteen cubits were for the one flank with their three columns and their three sockets,
and for the second flank on this side and on that side of the gate of the court, slung-sheets of fifteen cubits with their three columns and their three sockets.
All the slung-sheets of the court round about were of corded cambric.
The sockets for the columns were of copper, the hooks of the columns and their connections of silver; and the overlay of their heads with silver. And they, all the columns of the court, were connected with silver.
The portiere of the court gate was the handiwork of an embroiderer in blue, purple, double-dipped crimson and corded cambric. Twenty cubits was the length, and the rise in the width was five cubits, to correspond with the slung-sheets of the court.
Their columns were four and their sockets four, of copper, their hooks of silver and the overlay of their heads and their connections of silver.
All the pegs for the tabernacle and for the court round about were copper.
These are the notations as to the tabernacle, the tabernacle of the testimony, which were noted down at the bidding of Moses, a service of the Levites under the hand of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.
Bezalel son of Uri son of Hur of the stock of Judah made all that YHVH had instructed Moses.
With him was Aholiab son of Ahisamach of the stock of Dan, an artificer and brocade designer and embroiderer in blue, in purple, in double-dipped crimson and in cambric.
All the gold which was used for the work in all the work of the holy place, namely the gold of the wave offering, came to be twenty-nine talents and seven hundred thirty shekels by the shekel of the holy place.
The silver of those of the congregation who were mustered was a hundred talents and a thousand seven hundred seventy-five shekels by the shekel of the holy place,
a bekah for a pole (half a shekel, by the shekel of the holy place) for everyone passing over onto those mustered from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred three thousand five hundred fifty men.
It came to be that the hundred talents of silver were for casting the sockets of the holy place and the sockets of the curtain, a hundred sockets to a hundred talents, a talent to a socket.
The thousand seven hundred seventy-five shekels he made into hooks for the columns and overlaid their heads and made connections for them.
The copper of the wave offering was seventy talents and two thousand four hundred shekels.
So he made with it the sockets of the portal of the tent of appointment, and the copper altar with the copper grate which was for it, and all the furnishings of the altar,
and the sockets of the court round about, and the sockets of the gate of the court, and all the pegs of the tabernacle, and all the pegs of the court round about.
From the blue, the purple and the double dipped-crimson they made colored garments for ministering in the holy place. They made the holy garments which were for Aaron, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
He made the vestment of gold, blue, purple, double-dipped crimson and corded cambric.
They stamped the foils of gold, and he cut away wires to be worked into the midst of the blue, in the midst of the purple, in the midst of the double dipped-crimson and in the midst of the cambric, the handiwork of a designer.
Shoulderpieces they made for it, joining. On its two ends was it joined.
And the designed band of his vestment, which was on it, it was one piece with it, like its handiwork, of gold, blue, purple, double-dipped crimson and corded cambric, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
They worked on the onyx stones, set round about with mountings of gold filigree, engraved as the engravings of a seal according to the names of the sons of Israel.
And he placed them on the shoulderpieces of the vestment as memorial stones for the sons of Israel, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
Thean he made the breastplate, the handiwork of a designer, like the handiwork of the vestment, of gold, blue, purple, double-dipped crimson and corded cambric.
Square it came to be when doubled. They made the breastplate, a span its length and a span its width, when doubled.
They filled it with four rows of stones: a row of carnelian, peridot and emerald, the first row;
the second row of carbuncle, sapphire and diamond;
the third row of jacinth, agate and amethyst;
and the fourth row of topaz, onyx and jasper, set round about with mountings of gold filigree in their fillings.
The stones were twelve with the names of the sons of Israel, according to their names, as the engravings of a seal, each one according to its name for the twelve tribes.
They made on the breastplate boundaries of braid, a handiwork of rope, of pure gold.
They made two mountings of gold filigree and two rings of gold and put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate;
then they put the two ropes of gold on the two rings on the ends of the breastplate;
and the two ends of the two ropes they put on the two mountings; thus they put them on the shoulderpieces of the vestment to its forefront view.
They also made two rings of gold and placed them on the two ends of the breastplate, on its hem which was across the vestment, inside.
They made two rings of gold and put them on the two shoulderpieces of the vestment below its forefront view to correspond with its joining above to the designed band of the vestment.
Then they laced the breastplate by its rings to the rings of the vestment with blue twine, to come to be over the designed band of the vestment, so that the breastplate be not displaced from the vestment, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
He also made the robe of the vestment, the handiwork of a weaver, wholly of blue,
with the slit of the robe in its midst as the slit of a coat of mail, with a hem around its slit so that it be not torn.
On the skirts of the robe they made pomegranates of blue, purple, double-dipped crimson and corded cambric.
They made bells of pure gold and put the bells in the midst of the pomegranates on the skirts of the robe round about, in the midst of the pomegranates,
a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate on the skirts of the robe round about, for ministering, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
Then they made tunics of cambric, the handiwork of a weaver, for Aaron and for his sons,
And the turbans of cambric and the beautiful caps of cambric and the linen breeches of corded cambric
and the sash of corded cambric with blue, purple and double-dipped crimson, the handiwork of as embroiderer, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
They also made the holy insignia blossom of pure gold and wrote on it a writing like engravings of a seal: Holy to YHVH.
And they put blue twine on it to put it on the turban above, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
Thus all the service of the tabernacle of the tent of appointment was finished. And the sons of Israel did according to all that YHVH had instructed Moses. So they did.
Then they brought the tabernacle to Moses, the tent and all its furnishings, its links, its hollow tapers, its bars and its columns and its sockets,
also the cover of reddened rams' hides, the cover of azure hides and the portiere curtain,
the coffer of the testimony with its poles and the propitiatory shelter,
the table, with all its furnishings and the bread of the presence,
the pure lampstand and its lamps, with the lamps in array, and all its furnishings and oil for the luminary,
the golden altar, the anointing oil, the incense of spices and the portiere for the portal of the tent,
the copper altar and the copper grate which was for it, its poles and all its furnishings, the laver and its post,
the slung-sheets of the court with its columns and its sockets, the portiere for the court gate with its cords and its pegs, and all the furnishings for the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of appointment,
the colored garments for ministering in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons to serve as priests.
According to all that YHVH had instructed Moses, so the sons of Israel did all the service.
When Moses saw all the work, behold, they had done it just as YHVH had instructed; so had they done. And Moses blessed them.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
On the first day of the month, in month one, you shall set up the tabernacle of the tent of appointment.
You will place there the coffer of the testimony and screen off the coffer with the curtain.
You will bring the table and arrange its array and bring the lampstand and set up its lamps.
Then you will put the golden altar for incense before the coffer of the testimony and place the portiere of the portal to the tabernacle.
You will put the altar of ascent offering before the portal of the tabernacle of the tent of appointment,
and you will set the laver between the tent of appointment and the altar and put water therein.
You will set up the court round about and put up the portiere of the court gate.
You will take the anointing oil and anoint the tabernacle and all that is in it and hallow it and all its furnishings, that it will come to be holy.
You will also anoint the altar of ascent offering and all its furnishings and hallow the altar, that the altar will come to be a holy of holies.
And you will anoint the laver and its post and hallow it.
Then you will bring Aaron and his sons near to the portal of the tent of appointment and wash them in water
and put the holy garments on Aaron and anoint him and hallow him, that he serve as priest for Me.
And you shall bring his sons near and put tunics on them
and anoint them just as you anointed their father that they serve as priests for Me. So it will come to be that their anointing is to bestow on them as eonian priesthood throughout their generations.
Thus Moses did according to all that YHVH had instructed him. So he did.
Then it came to be on the first month in the second year since they went forth from Egypt, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was set up.
So Moses set up the tabernacle and laid its sockets, placed its hollow tapers, put in its bars and set up its columns.
Then he spread the tent over the tabernacle and placed the cover of the tent over it above, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
He took and bestowed the testimony into the coffer, placed the poles on the coffer, put the propitiatory shelter on the coffer above,
brought the coffer into the tabernacle and placed the portiere curtain so that it screened off the coffer of the testimony just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
He put the table in the tent of appointment at the flank of the tabernacle northward outside the curtain,
and he arranged on it the array of bread before YHVH, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
Then he placed the lampstand in the tent of appointment over against the table at the flank of the tabernacle toward the Negev,
and set up the lamps before YHVH, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
He placed the golden altar in the tent of appointment before the curtain
and caused incense of spices to fume on it just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
Then he placed the portiere of the portal to the tabernacle.
The altar of ascent offering he placed by the portal of the tabernacle of the tent of appointment, and he brought up on it the ascent offering and the approach present just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
He also placed the laver between the tent of appointment and the altar and put water therein for washing.
From it Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet.
When they entered into the tent of appointment and came near to the altar they washed, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
Then he set up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar and put up the portiere of the court gate. When Moses had finished all the work
and the cloud covered the tent of appointment, then the glory of YHVH filled the tabernacle,
so that Moses was unable to enter into the tent of appointment, for the cloud tabernacled on it, and the glory of YHVH filled the tabernacle.
Whenever the cloud ascended above the tabernacle the sons of Israel journeyed in all their journeyings.
Yet if the cloud was not taken up, then they would not journey until the day it was taken up;
for the cloud of YHVH was over the tabernacle by day, and fire, it came to be in it by night for the eyes of all the house of Israel in all their journeyings.
He called to Moses, and YHVH spoke to him from the tent of appointment, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them: When any man among you brings near an approach present to YHVH, from the domestic beasts (from the herd or from the flock) shall you bring near your approach present.
If his ascent approach is from the herd, a flawless male is it which he shall bring near. To the opening of the tent of appointment shall he bring it near for acceptance on his behalf before YHVH.
He will support his hand on the head of the ascent offering so that it will be accepted for him to make a propitiatory shelter over him.
Then he will slay the bull calf of the herd before YHVH; and the sons of Aaron, the priests, will bring near the blood and sprinkle the blood against the altar round about which is at the opening of the tent of appointment.
Then he will flay the ascent offering and piece it into its pieces,
while the sons of Aaron, the priests, put fire on the altar and arrange the wood on the fire.
The sons of Aaron, the priests, will arrange the pieces with the head and the suet over the wood on the fire which is on the altar,
while he shall wash its inwards and its shanks in water. Then the priest will cause the whole to fume on the altar. It is an ascent offering, a fire offering of fragrant odor to YHVH.
If his approach present is from the flock (from the sheep or from the goats) for an ascent offering, a flawless male is it which he shall bring near.
Then he will slay it on the flank of the altar northward before YHVH; and the sons of Aaron, the priests, will sprinkle its blood against the altar round about.
He will piece it into its pieces with its head and its suet; and the priest will arrange them over the wood on the fire which is on the altar;
and he shall wash the inwards and the shanks in water. Then the priest will bring near the whole and cause it to fume on the altar. It is an ascent offering, a fire offering of fragrant odor to YHVH.
If his ascent offering to YHVH is from the flyer then he will bring near turtledoves or dove squabs as his approach present.
The priest will bring it near to the altar and pinch off its head and cause it to fume on the altar; yet its blood will be wrung out against the sidewall of the altar.
Then he will take away its craw with its filthy contents and fling it beside the altar eastward at the place for the greasy ash.
He will cleave it at its wings yet shall not separate it. Then the priest will cause it to fume on the altar over the wood which is on the fire. It is an ascent offering, a fire offering of fragrant odor to YHVH.
When a soul brings near a cereal approach present to YHVH, of flour shall his approach present be; and he will pour oil on it and put frankincense on it. It is an approach present.
And he will bring it to the sons of Aaron, the priests. He will extract from there his full fistful of its flour and its oil along with all its frankincense. Then the priest will cause this memorial portion of it to fume on the altar; it is a fire offering of fragrant odor to YHVH.
Yet the rest from the approach present is for Aaron and for his sons, a holy of holies from the fire offerings of YHVH.
When you bring near an approach present, baked in the stove, it shall be unleavened perforated cakes of flour mingled with oil or unleavened wafers anointed with oil.
If an approach present on a pan is your approach present of flour, it shall be unleavened cakes mingled with oil.
You are to morsel it into morsels, and you will pour oil on it; it is an approach present.
If an approach present of the kettle is your approach present, of flour with oil shall it be made.
When you bring to YHVH the approach present which is made in any of these ways, bring it near to the priest that he may bring it close to the altar.
Then the priest will raise up from the approach present the memorial portion of it and cause it to fume on the altar; it is a fire offering of fragrant odor to YHVH.
Yet the rest of the approach present is for Aaron and for his sons, a holy of holies from the fire offerings of YHVH.
No approach present at all which you are bringing near to YHVH shall be made with leaven, for all yeast and all honey none of it shall you cause to fume as a fire offering to YHVH.
As an approach present of firstfruits shall you bring them near to YHVH, yet on the altar they shall not ascend for a fragrant odor.
All of your approach presents shall you salt with salt; and you shall not cause the salt of the covenant of your God to cease on your approach present. On all of your approach presents shall you bring salt near to YHVH your God.
Yet if you bring near an approach present of firstfruits to YHVH, you shall bring near pollinated ears toasted by fire, groats of the crop, as the approach present of your firstfruits.
When you will put oil on it and place frankincense on it, it is an approach present.
The priest will cause the memorial portion of it to fume from its groats and from its oil along with all its frankincense, a fire offering to YHVH.
If his approach present is a sacrifice of peace offerings, if from the herd he is bringing it near, whether male or female, a flawless one is it which he shall bring near before YHVH.
He will support his hand on the head of his approach present and slay it at the opening of the tent of appointment. And the sons of Aaron, the priests, will sprinkle the blood against the altar round about.
Then he will bring near from the sacrifice of peace offerings a fire offering to YHVH: the fat covering the inwards and all the fat which is on the inwards,
the two kidneys and the fat which is around them at the hips, and the protuberance on the liver; along with the kidneys shall he take it away.
Then the sons of Aaron will cause it to fume on the altar, on top of the ascent offering over the wood which is on the fire; it is a fire offering of fragrant odor to YHVH.
If his approach present for a sacrifice of peace offerings to YHVH is from the flock, male or female, a flawless one is it which he shall bring near.
If it is a sheep he is bringing near as his approach present then he shall bring it near before YHVH
and support his hand on the head of his approach present and slay it before the opening of the tent of appointment; and the sons of Aaron will sprinkle its blood against the altar round about.
Then he will bring near from the sacrifice of peace offerings a fire offering to YHVH: its fat, the flawless fat tail, cut off close to the spine, shall he take it away; also the fat covering the inwards and all the fat which is on the inwards,
the two kidneys and the fat which is around them at the hips, and the protuberance on the liver; along with the kidneys shall he take it away.
Then the priest will cause it to fume on the altar. It is the bread of the fire offering to YHVH.
If his approach present is a goat then he will bring it near before YHVH
and support his hand on its head and slay it before the tent of appointment; and the sons of Aaron, the priests, will sprinkle its blood against the altar round about.
Then he will bring near some of it as his fire approach to YHVH: the fat covering the inwards and all the fat which is on the inwards,
the two kidneys and the fat which is around them, at the hips, and the protuberance on the liver; along with the kidneys shall he take it away.
Then the priest will cause them to fume on the altar. It is the bread of the fire offering for a fragrant odor to YHVH. All the fat shall be for YHVH.
It shall be an eonian statute throughout your generations in all your dwellings; any fat or any blood you shall not eat.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, When a soul sins inadvertently, departing from any of YHVH's instructions of what should not be done, yet does any of them:
If the anointed priest should sin so as to bring guilt on the people, then he shall bring near for his sin with which he has sinned a flawless young bull calf of the herd, to YHVH as a sin offering.
He will bring the young bull to the opening of the tent of appointment before YHVH and support his hand on the head of the young bull and slay the young bull before YHVH.
Then the anointed priest, who had filled his hand, will take some of the blood of the young bull and bring it to the tent of appointment.
The priest will dip his finger into the blood and spatter some of the blood seven times before YHVH, at the surface of the curtain of the holy place.
And the priest will put some of the blood on the horns of the altar of the incense of spices before YHVH, which is in the tent of appointment. All the rest of the blood of the young bull shall he pour out at the foundation of the altar of ascent offering which is at the opening of the tent of appointment.
All the fat of the young bull of the sin offering shall he raise up from it, the fat covering the inwards and all the fat which is on the inwards,
the two kidneys and the fat which is around them, at the hips, and the protuberance on the liver; along with the kidneys shall he take it away,
just as it is being raised up from the bull of the sacrifice of peace offerings. Then the priest will cause them to fume on the altar of ascent offering.
Yet the hide of the young bull and all its flesh on its head and on its shanks, its inwards and its dung,
namely all left of the young bull will he bring forth outside the camp to a clean place, to the pouring out place of the greasy ash, and he will burn it over the sticks with fire. On the pouring out place of the greasy ash shall it be burned.
If the whole congregation of Israel should err inadvertently and the matter is obscured from the eyes of the assembly, and they do something departing from any of YHVH's instructions of what should not be done, and they realize their guilt
when the sin with which they have sinned becomes known, then the assembly will bring near a flawless young bull calf of the herd as a sin offering and bring it before the tent of appointment.
The elders of the congregation will support their hands on the head of the young bull before YHVH, and one will slay the young bull before YHVH.
And the anointed priest will bring some of the blood of the young bull to the tent of appointment.
The priest will dip his finger into the blood and spatter it seven times before YHVH, at the surface of the curtain of the holy place.
And some of the blood the priest shall put on the horns of the altar of the incense of spices before YHVH, which is in the tent of appointment. All the rest of the blood shall he pour out at the foundation of the altar of ascent offering which is at the opening of the tent of appointment.
All its fat shall he raise up from it and cause it to fume on the altar.
So he will do to the young bull just as he did to the young bull of the sin offering; thus shall he do to it. The priest will make a propitiatory shelter over them, and it will be pardoned them.
Then he will bring forth the young bull outside the camp and burn it just as he burned the former young bull. It is the sin offering for the assembly.
When a prince sins inadvertently and does something departing from any of the instructions of YHVH his God of what should not be done, and he realizes his guilt
when his sin with which he has sinned is made known to him, then he will bring as his approach present, a hairy one of the goats, a flawless male.
He will support his hand on the head of the hairy goat and slay it in the place where one should slay the ascent offering before YHVH. It is a sin offering.
The priest will take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of ascent offering. The rest of its blood shall he pour out at the foundation of the altar of ascent offering.
All its fat shall he cause to fume on the altar like the fat of the sacrifice of peace offerings. Thus the priest will make a propitiatory shelter over him for his sin, and it will be pardoned him.
If one soul of the people of the land should sin inadvertently when he does something departing from any of YHVH's instructions of what should not be done, and he realizes his guilt
when his sin with which he has sinned is made known to him, then he will bring as his approach present, a hairy one of the goats, a flawless female, for his sin with which he has sinned.
He will support his hand on the head of the sin offering and slay the sin offering in the place of the ascent offering.
And the priest will take some of its blood with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of ascent offering. All the rest of its blood shall he pour out at the foundation of the altar.
All its fat shall he take away, just as the fat is taken away from the sacrifice of peace offerings. Then the priest will cause it to fume on the altar as a fragrant odor to YHVH. Thus the priest will make a propitiatory shelter over him, and it will be pardoned him.
If he should bring a sheep as his approach present for a sin offering, a flawless female shall he bring.
He will support his hand on the head of the sin offering and slay it as a sin offering in the place where one should slay the ascent offering.
And the priest will take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of ascent offering. All the rest of its blood shall he pour out at the foundation of the altar.
All its fat shall he take away just as the fat of the sheep is taken away from the sacrifice of peace offerings. Then the priest will cause them to fume on the altar on top of the fire offerings of YHVH. Thus the priest will make a propitiatory shelter over him, for his sin with which he has sinned, and it will be pardoned him.
When a soul sins in that he heard the public voice of imprecation to testify, and he was a witness, whether he saw it or knew about it, if he should not profess then he will bear his depravity;
or when a soul touches any unclean thing, whether the carcass of an unclean animal or the carcass of an unclean domestic beast or the carcass of an unclean swarmer, even if it is obscured from him he has become unclean and has incurred guilt;
or when he touches human uncleanness, any of its uncleanness by which he would be unclean, even if it is obscured from him, when he himself realizes it, then he is guilty;
or when a soul swears, talking rashly with the lips to do evil or to do good as to anything of which a human talks rashly in an oath, even if it is obscured from him, when he himself realizes it, then he is guilty as to any one of these.
It will come to be when he realizes his guilt as to any one of these instances then he will confess in what way he has sinned;
and he will bring as his guilt offering to YHVH for his sin with which he has sinned, a female from the flock, a sheep or a hairy female of the goats, as a sin offering. Then the priest will make a propitiatory shelter over him for his sin with which he has sinned, and it will be pardoned him.
Should his hand not attain sufficient means for a flockling then he will bring as his guilt offering (because he has sinned), two turtledoves or two dove squabs to YHVH, one as a sin offering and one as an ascent offering.
He will bring them to the priest who will bring near the one for the sin offering first. The priest will pinch off its head toward its nape yet shall not separate it.
He will spatter some of the blood of the sin offering against the sidewall of the altar; and the remainder of the blood shall be wrung out at the foundation of the altar; it is a sin offering.
He shall offer the second as an ascent offering as is the custom. Thus the priest will make a propitiatory shelter over him for his sin with which he has sinned, and it will be pardoned him.
Should his hand not afford two turtledoves or two dove squabs then he will bring as his approach present (because he has sinned), a tenth of an ephah of flour as a sin offering. He shall not pour oil over it nor shall he put frankincense on it, for it is a sin offering.
He will bring it to the priest, and the priest will extract from it his full fistful as a memorial portion of it, and he will cause it to fume on the altar, on top of the fire offerings for YHVH; it is a sin offering.
Thus the priest will make a propitiatory shelter over him, for his sin with which he has sinned in any one of these instances, and it will be pardoned him. And the priest will come to have the rest as in the case of an approach present.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
When a soul offends with an offense and sins inadvertently in any of the holy things of YHVH, then he will bring as his guilt offering to YHVH, a flawless ram from the flock, by your appraisal in silver shekels by the shekel of the holy place, as a guilt offering.
Whatever he has sinned in any of the holy things he shall repay, add a fifth of its value to it and give it to the priest. The priest, he shall make a propitiatory shelter over him with the ram of the guilt offering; and it will be pardoned him.
When a soul should sin inadvertently and does something departing from any of the instructions of YHVH of what should not be done even if he does not know it, when he realizes his guilt and bears his depravity,
then he will bring a flawless ram from the flock, by your appraisal in silver shekels as a guilt offering to the priest. Thus the priest will make a propitiatory shelter over him for his error in which he has erred, even though he himself did not know it, and it will be pardoned him;
it is a guilt offering. He was guilty, yea guilty toward YHVH.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
When a soul sins and offends with an offense against YHVH and dissimulates against his companion in regard to committal or pledge of hand or pillage, or he extorts from his companion,
or he finds lost property and dissimulates in regard to it, or swears falsely in one or another of all the things which a human might do sinning by them:
when it will come to be that he sins and realizes his guilt, then he will restore the pillage which he pillaged, or the extortion which he extorted, or the committal which was committed to him, or the lost which he found,
or anything about which he swore falsely; he will repay it in its full value and add a fifth of its value to it. To him whose it is shall he give it on the day of his guilt offering.
He shall bring to the priest as his guilt offering to YHVH, a flawless ram from the flock, by your appraisal in silver shekels as a guilt offering.
Thus the priest will make a propitiatory shelter over him before YHVH, and it will be pardoned him for one or another of all the things which one might do to become guilty in it.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Instruct Aaron and his sons, saying, This is the law of the ascent offering: It is the ascent offering on account of its glow on the altar all night until the morning; the fire of the altar shall be kept glowing on it;
and the priest will put on his linen coat, and he shall put on linen breeches over his flesh. He will raise up the greasy ash to which the fire has devoured the ascent offering on the altar and place it beside the altar.
Then he will strip off his garments and put on other garments and bring forth the greasy ash outside the camp to a clean place.
Yet the fire on the altar shall be kept glowing on it; it shall not be quenched. The priest will make wood consume on it morning by morning and arrange the ascent offering on it and cause the fat portions of the peace offerings to fume on it.
The fire shall be kept glowing continually on the altar; it shall not be quenched.
This is the law of the approach present. The sons of Aaron are to bring it near before YHVH, in view of the altar.
Then one will raise up from it his fistful of the flour of the approach present and of its oil and all the frankincense which is on the approach present and cause it to fume on the altar; it is a fragrant odor, a memorial portion, to YHVH.
And the rest of it Aaron and his sons shall eat. As unleavened cakes shall it be eaten in a holy place. In the court of the tent of appointment shall they eat it.
It shall not be baked with leaven. As their portion I give it from My fire offering. It is a holy of holies, like the sin offering and like the guilt offering.
Every male among the sons of Aaron may eat of it. It is an eonian statute throughout your generations from the fire offerings of YHVH. All that may touch them is holy.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
This is the approach present of Aaron and his sons which they shall bring near to YHVH on the day of his anointing: A tenth of an ephah of flour as an approach present continually, half of it in the morning and half of it in the evening.
On a pan with oil shall it be made. Fried shall you bring it. Baked morsels of the approach present shall you bring near, a fragrant odor to YHVH.
And the priest anointed in his stead from among his sons shall do it. It is an eonian statute to YHVH. Wholly shall it be caused to fume;
every approach present of a priest shall come to be wholly fumed; it shall not be eaten.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to Aaron and to his sons, saying, This is the law of the sin offering. In the place where the ascent offering is slain the sin offering shall be slain before YHVH; it is a holy of holies.
The priest making it a sin offering, shall eat it. In a holy place shall it be eaten, in the court of the tent of appointment.
All that may touch its flesh is holy. And when some of its blood is spattered on a garment, you shall rinse that on which it is spattered in a holy place.
Yet the earthenware vessel in which it is cooked shall be broken. And if it is cooked in a copper vessel, it will be scoured and laved in water.
Every male among the priests shall eat it; it is a holy of holies.
Yet any sin offering from which blood is brought into the tent of appointment to make a propitiatory shelter in the holy place shall not be eaten. In fire shall it be burned.
This is the law of the guilt offering; it is a holy of holies.
In the place where they slay the ascent offering they shall slay the guilt offering. Its blood shall one sprinkle against the altar round about;
and all its fat shall he bring near from it: the fat tail, the fat covering the inwards,
and all the fat which is on the inwards, the two kidneys and the fat which is around them, at the hips, and the protuberance on the liver; along with the kidneys shall he take it away.
Then the priest will cause them to fume on the altar, a fire offering to YHVH; it is a guilt offering.
Every male among the priests shall eat of it. In a holy place shall it be eaten; it is a holy of holies.
As the sin offering so is the guilt offering. There is one law for them. The priest who makes the propitiatory shelter with it, his shall it become.
And the priest who is bringing near a man's ascent offering, the hide of the ascent offering which he brings near is for the priest; his shall it become.
And every approach present which is baked in a stove and all that is made in a kettle or on a pan is for the priest who is bringing it near; his shall it become.
Yet every other approach present, mingled with oil and drained, shall be for all the sons of Aaron, each man as his brother.
This is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings which one may bring near to YHVH.
If he should bring it near for an acclamation then along with the acclamation sacrifice he will bring near unleavened perforated cakes mingled with oil and unleavened wafers anointed with oil and fried perforated cakes of flour mingled with oil.
With perforated cakes of leavened bread shall he bring near his approach present, along with the acclamation sacrifice of his peace offerings.
And from it he will bring near one of each kind of approach present as a heave offering to YHVH for the priest who is sprinkling the blood of the peace offerings; his shall it become.
As for the flesh of the acclamation sacrifice of his peace offerings, on the day of his approach present shall it be eaten. None of it shall he leave until morning.
If his approach present is a vow or a voluntary sacrifice, it shall be eaten on the day of his approach with his sacrifice, and on the morrow the rest of it may be eaten.
Yet the rest of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day shall be burned with fire.
If any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings should be eaten, yea eaten, on the third day, the one bringing it near shall not be accepted; it shall not be reckoned to him. Vile shall it become, and the soul eating any of it shall bear his depravity.
As for flesh which is touching anything unclean, it shall not be eaten; in fire shall it be burned. As for other flesh, everyone clean may eat of the flesh.
Yet the soul who eats flesh from the sacrifice of peace offerings, which are to YHVH, while his uncleanness is on him, that soul will be cut off from his kinsmen.
When a soul touches anything unclean, the uncleanness of a human or an unclean beast or any unclean swarmer, and eats any of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings which are to YHVH, then that soul will be cut off from his kinsmen.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, You shall not eat any fat from a bull, sheep or goat.
The fat of a carcass and the fat of that torn to pieces may be used for any work, yet you shall not eat, yea eat it.
When anyone is eating the fat from the beast of which he brings near a fire offering to YHVH, then the soul who is eating will be cut off from his kinsmen.
And no blood at all shall you eat in any of your dwellings, of flyer or of beast.
Any soul who eats any blood, that soul will be cut off from his kinsmen.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, The one bringing near the sacrifice of his peace offerings to YHVH shall bring his approach present to YHVH from the sacrifice of his peace offerings.
His hands, they shall bring the fire offerings of YHVH. The fat on the chest, he shall bring it and the chest to wave it as a wave offering before YHVH.
Then the priest will cause the fat to fume on the altar, and the chest will come to be for Aaron and for his sons.
The right leg shall you give as a heave offering to the priest from the sacrifices of your peace offerings.
The one of the sons of Aaron bringing near the blood of peace offerings and the fat shall come to have the right leg as an assigned share,
for the wave breast and the heave leg I take from the sons of Israel, from the sacrifices of their peace offerings, and I shall give them to Aaron the priest and to his sons as an eonian statute, due from the sons of Israel.
This is the anointed right of Aaron and the anointed right of his sons from the fire offerings of YHVH on the day he brought them near to serve as priests to YHVH,
which YHVH instructed to give to them on the day of his anointing them, from the sons of Israel. It is an eonian statute throughout their generations.
This is the law for the ascent offering, for the cereal approach present, for the sin offering, for the guilt offering, for the consecrations and for the sacrifice of peace offerings,
as YHVH had instructed Moses on Mount Sinai on the day when He gave instructions that the sons of Israel bring near their approach presents to YHVH in the wilderness of Sinai.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Take Aaron and his sons with him and the garments and the anointing oil and the young bull of the sin offering and the two rams and the tray of unleavened cakes
and assemble the whole congregation at the opening of the tent of appointment.
Moses did just as YHVH had instructed him; the congregation was assembled at the opening of the tent of appointment;
and Moses said to the congregation: This is the thing which YHVH has instructed us to do.
So Moses brought near Aaron and his sons and washed them with water,
put the tunic on him, girded him with the sash, clothed him with the robe and put the vestment on him. Then he girded him with the designed band of the vestment and invested him with it.
He placed the breastplate on him and put the Urim and the Thummim in the breastplate.
Then he placed the turban on his head and placed on the turban at the forefront of his face the gold blossom, the holy insignia, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
Moses took the anointing oil and anointed the tabernacle and all that was in it and hallowed them.
Then he spattered some of it against the altar seven times and anointed the altar and all its furnishings and the laver and its base to hallow them.
He poured some of the anointing oil on the head of Aaron and anointed him to hallow him.
Then Moses brought near the sons of Aaron and clothed them with tunics and girded them with a sash and bound up for them the caps just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
He brought close the young bull of the sin offering; and Aaron and his sons supported their hands on the head of the young bull of the sin offering.
One slew it, and Moses took the blood and put some of it on the horns of the altar round about with his finger, and he made a sin offering on the altar; and the rest of the blood he poured out at the foundation of the altar and hallowed it to make a propitiatory shelter over it.
Then he took all the fat which was on the inwards and the protuberance of the liver and the two kidneys and their fat; and Moses caused it to fume on the altar.
The young bull with its hide, its flesh and its dung one burned with fire outside the camp just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
He brought near the ram of the ascent offering, and Aaron and his sons supported their hands on the head of the ram.
One slew it, and Moses sprinkled the blood against the altar round about.
One pieced the ram into its pieces; and Moses caused the head, the pieces and the suet to fume.
One washed the inwards and the shanks in water; and Moses caused the whole ram to fume on the altar. It was an ascent offering for a fragrant odor; it was a fire offering to YHVH, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
He brought near the second ram, the ram of consecrations, and Aaron and his sons supported their hands on the head of the ram.
One slew it, and Moses took some of its blood and put it on the lobe of Aaron's right ear, on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot,
and he brought near the sons of Aaron. Moses also put some of the blood on the lobe of their right ear, on the thumb of their right hand and on the big toe of their right foot. Then Moses sprinkled the rest of the blood against the altar round about.
He took the fat, the fat tail and all the fat which was on the inwards and the protuberance of the liver and the two kidneys and their fat and the right leg.
From the tray of unleavened cakes which is before YHVH he took one unleavened perforated cake and one perforated cake of oil bread and one wafer, and he placed them on the fat portions and on the right leg.
He put the whole on the palms of Aaron and on the palms of his sons and waved them as a wave offering before YHVH.
Then Moses took them off their palms and caused them to fume on the altar on top of the ascent offering; they were consecrations for a fragrant odor. It was a fire offering to YHVH.
Now Moses took the chest and waved it as a wave offering before YHVH. It was for Moses, the assigned share from the ram of consecrations just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
Moses took some of the anointing oil and some of the blood which was on the altar and spattered it on Aaron, on his garments and on his sons and on his sons' garments with him; so he hallowed Aaron, his garments and his sons and his sons' garments with him.
Moses said to Aaron and to his sons: Cook the flesh at the opening of the tent of appointment, and there you shall eat it and the bread that is in the tray of consecrations just as I have been instructed, saying: Aaron and his sons, they shall eat it.
Now the rest of the flesh and of the bread shall you burn with fire;
and from the opening of the tent of appointment you shall not go forth for seven days until the day to fulfill the days of your consecrations, because for seven days shall one fill your hands.
Just as one has done in this day so YHVH had instructed to do, to make a propitiatory shelter over you.
At the opening of the tent of appointment shall you dwell by day and night for seven days; keep this charge of YHVH that you may not die, for so have I been instructed.
Thus Aaron and his sons did all the things which YHVH had instructed by means of Moses.
It came to be on the eighth day that Moses called Aaron and his sons and the elders of Israel.
He said to Aaron: Take for yourself a young bull calf of the herd as a sin offering, and a ram for an ascent offering, both of the flawless, and bring them near before YHVH.
And to the sons of Israel shall you speak, saying: Take a hairy one of the goats as a sin offering, also a calf and a sheep both of them a year old and flawless, as an ascent offering,
also a bull and a ram for peace offerings to sacrifice before YHVH, and an approach present mingled with oil, for today YHVH will appear to you.
So they took what Moses has instructed in view of the tent of appointment. And the whole congregation came near and stood before YHVH;
and Moses said: This is the thing which YHVH has instructed that you should do so that the glory of YHVH may appear to you.
Then Moses said to Aaron: Come near to the altar, offer your sin offering and your ascent offering, make a propitiatory shelter about you and about the people, offer the approach present of the people, and make a propitiatory shelter about them, just as YHVH has instructed.
Aaron came near to the altar and slew the calf of the sin offering which was for himself.
When the sons of Aaron brought near the blood to him, he dipped his finger into the blood and put it on the horns of the altar, and the rest of the blood he poured out at the foundation of the altar.
The fat and the kidneys and the protuberance of the liver from the sin offering he caused to fume on the altar just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
The flesh and the hide one burned with fire outside the camp.
Then he slew the ascent offering. When the sons of Aaron provided him with the blood, he sprinkled it against the altar round about.
For the ascent offering they provided him with its pieces and the head; and he caused them to fume on the altar.
He washed the inwards and the shanks and caused them to fume on top of the ascent offering on the altar.
Then he came near with the approach present of the people and took the hairy goat of the sin offering which was for the people, slew it and made it a sin offering like the first.
He brought near the ascent offering and did it as is the custom.
He brought near the approach present, filled his palm from it and caused it to fume on the altar aside from the ascent offering of the morning.
Then he slew the bull and the ram, the sacrifice of peace offerings which were for the people. When the sons of Aaron provided him with the blood, he sprinkled it against the altar round about.
As for the fat portions from the bull and from the ram, the fat tail and the covering fat, the kidneys and the protuberance of the liver 
they placed the fat portions on top of the chests and caused the fat to fume on the altar.
The chests and the right leg Aaron waved as a wave offering before YHVH just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
Then Aaron lifted up his hands toward the people and blessed them. He descended after he had made the sin offering, the ascent offering and the peace offerings.
Now Moses and Aaron went into the tent of appointment; when they came forth, they blessed the people. Then the glory of YHVH appeared to all the people;
fire came forth from before YHVH, and it devoured the ascent offering and the fat portions on the altar. When all the people saw it, they were jubilant and fell on their faces.
The sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, each took his fire-pan, put fire in them, placed incense on it and came near before YHVH with alien fire such as He had not instructed them.
Hence fire came forth from before YHVH and devoured them, and they died before YHVH.
Then Moses said to Aaron: That is what YHVH spoke of, saying: Among those near Me shall I be hallowed, and in the presence of all the people shall I be glorified. Aaron was still;
and Moses called to Mishael and to Elzaphan, sons of Uzziel, uncle of Aaron, and said to them: Come near, and carry your brothers from the presence of the holy place outside the camp.
So they came near and carried them in their tunics outside the camp, just as Moses had spoken.
Then Moses said to Aaron and to Eleazar and to Ithamar, his sons: Do not dishevel your heads' hair and do not rip your garments so that you may not die, lest He be wrathful with the whole congregation. Yet your brothers, all the house of Israel, they may lament over the burning which YHVH has burned.
And from the opening of the tent of appointment you shall not come forth lest you die, for the anointing oil of YHVH is on you. So they did according to the words of Moses.
YHVH spoke to Aaron saying:
Do not drink wine or intoxicant, you or your sons with you, when you come into the tent of appointment, so that you may not die. It shall be an eonian statute throughout your generations,
to differentiate between the holy and the profane, and between the unclean and the clean,
and to direct the sons of Israel in all the statutes which YHVH has spoken to them by means of Moses.
Moses spoke to Aaron and to Eleazar and to Ithamar, his sons who were left: Take the approach present, the rest of the fire offerings of YHVH, and eat it unleavened beside the altar, for it is a holy of holies.
You will eat it in a holy place, for it is your dole and your sons' dole from the fire offerings of YHVH, for thus have I been instructed.
But the chest of the wave offering and the leg of the heave offering shall you eat in a clean place, you and your sons and your daughters with you, for as your dole and your sons' dole are they given from the sacrifices of peace offerings of the sons of Israel.
The leg of the heave offering and the chest of the wave offering on the fire offerings of the fat portions shall they bring to wave as a wave offering before YHVH. And it will become yours and your sons' with you as an eonian dole just as YHVH has given instructions.
Now as to the hairy goat of the sin offering, Moses inquired, yea inquired, but behold, it had been burned up. He was wrathful at Eleazar and at Ithamar, the sons of Aaron who were left, saying:
For what reason did you not eat the sin offering in the holy place? For it was a holy of holies, and He gave it to you to bear the depravity of the congregation, to make a propitiatory shelter over them before YHVH.
Behold, its blood was not brought to the holy place inside. You should have eaten, yea eaten it in the holy place, just as I have given instructions.
Aaron spoke to Moses: Behold, today they brought near their sin offering and their ascent offering before YHVH, yet meeting me are such things as these; and had I eaten the sin offering today, would it be good in the eyes of YHVH?
When Moses heard this, it was good in his eyes.
YHVH spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying to them:
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, These are the animals which you may eat of all the beasts which are on the land.
Every one bisecting the hoof and cleaving the cleft of the hooves and bringing up the cud among beasts, you may eat it.
Only this is what you may not eat of those bringing up the cud or bisecting the hoof: the camel (for it is bringing up the cud yet is not bisecting the hoof; it is unclean for you),
the coney, (for it is bringing up the cud yet is not bisecting the hoof; it is unclean for you),
the hare, (for it is bringing up the cud yet does not bisect the hoof; it is unclean for you),
and the boar, (for it is bisecting the hoof and is cleaving the cleft of the hoof, yet it is not stirring up the cud; it is unclean for you).
Of their flesh you may not eat, and their carcass you may not touch; they are unclean for you.
This is what you may eat of all those which are in the waters: all that have fins and scales in the waters, in the seas and in the watercourses, you may eat them.
Yet all that have no fins or scales in the waters, in the seas and in the watercourses of every swarmer of the waters, of any living soul which is in the waters, they are an abomination to you.
Since they shall come to be an abomination for you, you may not eat of their flesh, and you shall regard their carcass as abominable.
All that has no fins or scales in the waters, it is an abomination to you.
These you shall regard as abominable among the flyers; they shall not be eaten; they are an abomination: the vulture, the bearded vulture and the eagle,
the black kite and the falcon, all of its kind,
every raven, all of its kind,
the ostrich, the screech owl, the gull and the hawk, all of its kind,
the little owl, the cormorant and the eagle owl,
the ibis, the pelican and the Egyptian vulture,
the stork, the heron, all of its kind, the hoopoe and the bat.
Every swarmer of the flyers going on all fours, it is an abomination to you.
Only this one you may eat of every swarmer of the flyers, the one going on all fours which has shanks above its feet to hop with them on the land.
These of them may you eat: the locust, all of its kind, the bald locust, all of its kind, the cricket, all of its kind, and the grasshopper, all of its kind.
Yet every other swarmer of the flyers which has four feet, it is an abomination to you.
Also you are defiling yourselves with these: (Everyone touching their carcass shall be unclean until the evening;
everyone carrying some of their carcass shall rinse his garments and will be unclean until the evening.)
As for every beast which is bisecting the hoof, yet the cleft it is not cleaving, and the cud it is not bringing up: they are unclean to you. Everyone touching them shall be unclean.
And everything going on its soles among all the animals going on all fours, they are unclean to you. Everyone touching their carcass shall be unclean until the evening;
and the one carrying their carcass shall rinse his garments and will be unclean until the evening. They are unclean to you.
This is unclean to you among the swarmers swarming on the land: the weasel, the rodent and the great lizard, all of its kind,
the gecko, the monitor, the lizard, the sand lizard and the chameleon.
These are unclean to you among all the swarmers. Everyone touching them in their death shall be unclean until the evening.
And everything on which any of them should fall in their death shall be unclean; from every article of wood or garment or leather or sackcloth, to every article in which work is done, into water shall it be brought, and it will be unclean until the evening; then it will be clean.
Yet every earthenware vessel into the midst of which any of them should fall, all that is in its midst shall be unclean, and you shall break it.
Any food which may otherwise be eaten on which such water should come shall be unclean; and any drink which may otherwise be drunk in any such vessel shall be unclean.
Also everything on which some of their carcass should fall shall be unclean; a stove or an oven shall be broken down. They are unclean; they shall become unclean to you.
Only a spring or cistern, a confluence of water, shall remain clean. Yet the one touching their carcass shall be unclean.
In case anything from their carcass should fall on any sowing seed which was sown, it shall be clean;
yet in case water was put on the seed and anything from their carcass fell on it, it shall be unclean to you.
In case any of the beasts which is yours for food dies, the one touching any of its carcass shall be unclean until the evening.
And the one eating any of its carcass shall rinse his garments and will be unclean until the evening. Also the one carrying any of its carcass shall rinse his garments and will be unclean until the evening.
Any swarmer swarming on the land, it is an abomination; it shall not be eaten.
All going on the torso and all going on all fours, even all on many pairs of feet of any swarmer swarming on the land, you may not eat them, for they are an abomination.
Do not make your souls abominable with any swarming swarmer, nor shall you defile yourselves with them, or you will be unclean by them.
For I, YHVH, am your God, so you will sanctify yourselves and become holy, for I am holy. Hence you shall not defile your souls with any swarmer moving on the land.
For I, YHVH, am the One bringing you up from the land of Egypt, to be your God; so become holy, for I am holy.
This is the law about the beast, the flyer and every living soul moving in the water and about every soul swarming on the land,
to differentiate between the unclean and the clean, between the animal which may be eaten and the animal which may not be eaten.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, When a woman conceives seed and bears a male then she will be unclean seven days; as the days of her menstrual period shall she be unclean.
On the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised.
Then she shall dwell thirty-three days more in her cleansing blood-flows. She shall not touch anything holy, and she shall not come to the sanctuary until the days of her cleansing be full.
And if she should bear a female, then she will be unclean two weeks, as during her period, and she shall dwell sixty-six days more in her cleansing blood-flows.
When the days of her cleansing are full, for a son or for a daughter she shall bring a year-old he-lamb as an ascent offering and a dove squab or a turtledove as a sin offering to the priest at the opening of the tent of appointment.
He will bring it near before YHVH and make a propitiatory shelter over her, and she will be clean from the fountain of her blood-flows. This is the law for the one giving birth to a male or to a female.
Yet if she should not find her means sufficient for a flockling then she will take two turtledoves or two dove squabs, one for an ascent offering and one for a sin offering; the priest will make a propitiatory shelter over her; then she will be clean.
YHVH spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying:
In case a human comes to have in the skin of his flesh a nodule or a scurf or a blotch, and it comes in the skin of his flesh as the contagion of leprous disease, then the matter will be brought before Aaron the priest, or before one of his sons the priests.
When the priest examines the contagious area in the skin of the flesh, and the hair in the contagious area has turned white and the appearance of the contagion is deeper than the skin of his flesh, it is the contagion of leprous disease. When the priest has examined it he will pronounce him unclean.
Yet if the blotch is white, that in the skin of his flesh, and is not deeper in its appearance than the skin, and its hair has not turned white, then the priest will enclose the contagious person seven days.
The priest will examine him on the seventh day, and behold, if in his eyes the contagion stays, the contagion has not diffused in the skin, then the priest will enclose him a second seven days.
The priest will examine him on the second seventh day, and behold, if the contagion is inconspicuous and the contagion has not diffused in the skin, then the priest will pronounce him clean; it is a scurf. He will rinse his garments; then he will be clean.
Yet if the scurf should have diffused, yea diffused in the skin after his appearance before the priest for his cleansing, then he will show himself a second time to the priest.
When the priest has examined, and behold, if the scurf has diffused in the skin, then the priest will pronounce him unclean; it is a leprous disease.
In case the contagion of a leprous disease comes to be in a human, then the matter will be brought before the priest.
The priest will examine, and behold, if a white nodule is in the skin and it has turned the hair white and live flesh is staying alive in the nodule,
it is a chronic leprous disease in the skin of his flesh. Then the priest will pronounce him unclean; he shall not enclose him, for he is unclean.
Yet if the leprous disease should bud, yea bud in the skin so that the leprous disease covers all the skin of the contagious person, from his head unto his feet, to all appearances in the eyes of the priest,
then the priest will examine, and behold, if the leprous disease covers all his flesh, he will pronounce the contagion clean; all of it has turned white; he is clean.
Yet on the day live flesh appears in it, he shall be unclean.
When the priest has examined the live flesh, he will pronounce him unclean. The live flesh, it is unclean; it is a leprous disease.
Or in case the live flesh reverses and is turned to white, then he will come to the priest.
The priest will examine him, and behold, if the contagion is turned to white, then the priest will pronounce the contagion clean; he is clean.
In case the flesh comes to have a boil in it, in its skin, and it is healed,
and there comes in place of the boil a white nodule or a reddish white blotch, then he will show himself to the priest.
The priest will examine, and behold, if its appearance is lower than the skin, and its hair has turned white, then the priest will pronounce him unclean; it is the contagion of leprous disease. In the boil has it budded.
Yet when the priest examines it, and behold, there is no white hair in it, and it is not lower than the skin, and it is inconspicuous, then the priest will enclose him seven days.
And if it should have diffused, yea diffused in the skin, then the priest will pronounce him unclean; it is the contagion.
Yet if, in its stead, the blotch stays and does not diffuse, it is the puckered scar of the boil. And the priest will pronounce him clean.
Or in case the flesh comes to have a fiery scorch in its skin, and the living scorch becomes a reddish white or white blotch,
then the priest will examine it, and behold, if the hair in the blotch has turned white and its appearance is deeper than the skin, it is a leprous disease. In the scorch has it budded. The priest will pronounce him unclean; it is the contagion of leprous disease.
Yet if the priest examines it and behold, there is no white hair in the blotch and it is not lower than the skin and it is inconspicuous then the priest will enclose him seven days.
Then the priest will examine him on the seventh day. If it should have diffused, yea diffused in the skin, then the priest will pronounce him unclean. It is the contagion of leprous disease.
Yet if, in its stead, the blotch stays and does not diffuse in the skin, and it is inconspicuous, it is a nodule of the scorch. Then the priest will pronounce him clean, for it is the puckered scar of the scorch.
In case a man or a woman comes to have the contagion in him on the head or in the beard,
then the priest will examine the contagion, and behold, if its appearance is deeper than the skin and yellow, thin hair is on it, then the priest will pronounce him unclean. It is a scall; it is a leprous disease of the head or the beard.
Yet when the priest examines the contagion of the scall, and behold, if its appearance is not deeper than the skin, and there is no dusky hair on it, then the priest will enclose the one with the contagion of the scall seven days.
Then the priest will examine the contagion on the seventh day, and behold, if the scall has not diffused, no yellow hair has come to be on it and the appearance of the scall is not deeper than the skin,
then he will shave himself, yet the scall he shall not shave, and the priest will enclose the one with the scall a second seven days.
Then the priest will examine the scall on the seventh day, and behold, if the scall has not diffused on the skin and its appearance is not deeper than the skin, then the priest will pronounce him clean. He will rinse his garments and be clean.
Yet if the scall should have diffused, yea diffused on the skin after his cleansing,
then the priest will examine him, and behold, if the scall has diffused on the skin, the priest shall make no quest for yellow hair. He is unclean.
Yet if, in his eyes, the scall stays and dusky hair has sprouted on it, the scall is healed. He is clean, and the priest will pronounce him clean.
When a man or a woman comes to have blotches on the skin of their flesh, white blotches,
then the priest will examine, and behold, if on the skin of their flesh the blotches are inconspicuous white, it is an eruption; it has budded on the skin. He is clean.
When a man's head is burnished and he is bald; he is clean.
And if his head is burnished from the edge of his face and he has a bald forehead, he is clean.
Yet when there comes to be a reddish white contagion on his baldhead or on his bald forehead, it is a budding leprous disease on his baldhead or on his bald forehead.
Then the priest will examine him, and behold, if the nodule of the contagion is reddish white on his baldhead or on his bald forehead, as the appearance of a leprous disease of the skin of the flesh,
he is a leprous man; he is unclean. The priest shall pronounce him unclean, yea unclean; his contagion is on his head.
As for the leprous man in whom the contagion is, his garments, they shall come to be ripped, and his head shall come to be disheveled, and he shall muffle the upper lip; and, Unclean! Unclean! shall he call.
All the days in which the contagion is in him he shall be unclean. He is unclean and shall dwell solitarily; his dwelling shall be outside the camp.
In case a garment comes to have the contagion of a leprous mold in it, in a woollen garment or in a flaxen garment,
in the spun yarn or in the woven piece of flax and of wool, in leather or in any leather work,
and the contagion becomes greenish or reddish in the garment or in the leather or in the spun yarn or in the woven piece or in any article of leather, it is the contagion of leprous mold, and it is to be shown to the priest.
The priest will examine the contagion and enclose the contagious thing seven days.
Then he will examine the contagion on the seventh day. In case the contagion has diffused in the garment, in the spun yarn or in the woven piece, in leather of any workmanship which is made of leather, the contagion is a festering leprous mold; it is unclean.
He will burn the garment or the spun yarn or the woven piece, in wool or in flax or any article of leather in which the contagion comes to be, for it is a festering leprous mold. In fire shall it be burned.
When the priest examines, and behold, the contagion has not diffused in the garment, in the spun yarn or in the woven piece or in any article of leather,
then the priest will instruct them, and they will rinse that which had the contagion in it, and he will enclose it a second seven days.
Then the priest will examine after the contagion has been rinsed, and behold, if the contagion has not turned its visible appearance even though the contagion has not diffused, it is unclean. With fire shall you burn it whether it is pitted in its back or in its front.
When the priest examines, and behold, the contagion is inconspicuous after it has been rinsed, he will tear it from the garment or from the leather, from the spun yarn or from the woven piece.
Yet if it should still appear in the garment, in the spun yarn or in the woven piece or in any article of leather, it is budding out. With fire shall you burn that which has the contagion in it.
As to the garment, the spun yarn or the woven piece, or any article of leather which you are rinsing when the contagion withdraws from it, it will be rinsed a second time; then it will be clean.
This is the law of the contagion of leprous mold in a woollen or flaxen garment, the spun yarn or the woven piece, or any article of leather, for pronouncing it clean or for pronouncing it unclean.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
This shall come to be the law of the leprous man in the day of his cleansing; when the matter is brought before the priest,
then the priest will go forth outside the camp. When the priest examines, and behold, the contagion of leprous disease is healed in the leprous man,
then the priest will instruct that they take for the one cleansing himself two living clean birds and cedar wood, double-dipped crimson yarn and hyssop.
The priest will instruct that they slay one bird in an earthenware vessel over live water.
Then he shall take the living bird, it and the cedar wood, the double-dipped crimson yarn and the hyssop, and he will dip them and the living bird into the blood of the bird slain over the live water.
Then he will spatter it seven times on the one cleansing himself from the leprous disease, and pronounce him clean. He will send the living bird free over the surface of the field.
The one cleansing himself will rinse his garments and shave off all his hair and wash in water; then he will be clean. Afterward he may come into the camp, yet he will dwell outside his tent seven days.
Then it will come to be on the seventh day that he shall shave off all his hair from his head, his beard and his eyebrows, even all his hair shall he shave off; when he has rinsed his garments and bathed his flesh in water, then he will be clean.
On the eighth day he shall take two flawless he-lambs, and one flawless ewe lamb, a year old, three tenths of an ephah of flour, an approach present mingled with oil, and one log of oil.
The priest pronouncing the man clean will cause them and the one cleansing himself to stand before YHVH at the opening of the tent of appointment.
Then the priest will take one he-lamb and bring it near as a guilt offering with the log of oil and wave them as a wave offering before YHVH.
He will slay the he-lamb in the place where he slays the sin offering and the ascent offering in the holy place, for like the sin offering, the guilt offering, it is for the priest; it is a holy of holies.
The priest will take some of the blood of the guilt offering, and the priest will put it on the lobe of the right ear of the one cleansing himself, on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot.
Then the priest will take some of the log of oil and pour it on the priest's left palm.
The priest will dip his right finger into the oil which is on his left palm and spatter some of the oil with his finger seven times before YHVH.
Some of the oil which is left on his palm the priest shall put on the lobe of the right ear of the one cleansing himself, on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot, over the blood of the guilt offering.
And the rest of the oil which is on the palm of the priest shall he put on the head of the one cleansing himself. Thus the priest will make a propitiatory shelter over him before YHVH.
Then the priest will make the sin offering, make a propitiatory shelter over the one cleansing himself from his uncleanness, and afterward slay the ascent offering.
The priest will bring up the ascent offering and the approach present on the altar before YHVH. When the priest makes a propitiatory shelter over him, then he will be clean.
If he is poor and his hand cannot afford it then he will take one he-lamb as a guilt offering for a wave offering to make a propitiatory shelter over him, one tenth of an ephah of flour mingled with oil for an approach present, a log of oil,
and two turtledoves or two dove squabs whichever his hand can afford. One will come to be a sin offering and the other an ascent offering.
He will bring them on the eighth day, for his cleansing, to the priest at the opening of the tent of appointment before YHVH.
And the priest will take the he-lamb of the guilt offering and the log of oil, and the priest will wave them as a wave offering before YHVH.
Then he will slay the he-lamb of the guilt offering; the priest will take some of the blood of the guilt offering and put it on the lobe of the right ear of the one cleansing himself, on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot.
Some of the oil the priest shall pour on the priest's left palm;
and the priest will spatter with his right finger some of the oil which is on his left palm seven times before YHVH.
Then the priest will put some of the oil which is on his palm on the lobe of the right ear of the one cleansing himself, on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot on the same place as the blood of the guilt offering.
And the rest of the oil which is on the palm of the priest he shall put on the head of the one cleansing himself to make a propitiatory shelter over him before YHVH.
He will offer one of the turtledoves or of the dove squabs from whichever his hand can afford.
Of that which his hand can afford the one is for a sin offering and the other for an ascent offering along with the approach present. Thus the priest will make a propitiatory shelter over the one cleansing himself before YHVH.
This is the law for one in whom is the contagion of leprous disease whose hand cannot afford more for his cleansing.
YHVH spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying:
When you come to the land of Canaan which I am giving to you for a holding and I put the contagion of leprous mold in a house of the land of your holding,
then he to whom the house belongs will come and tell the priest, saying: Something that appears to me like the contagion is in the house.
The priest will instruct that they clear out the house ere the priest comes to examine the contagion, so that all which is in the house shall not be unclean. Afterward the priest shall come to examine the house.
He will examine the contagion, and behold, if the contagion in the sidewalls of the house has greenish or reddish concavities and their appearance is lower than the sidewall,
the priest will go forth from the house to the opening of the house, and he will lock the house seven days.
When the priest returns on the seventh day and examines, and behold, if the contagion has diffused in the sidewalls of the house,
then the priest will instruct that they pull off the stones which have the contagion in them and fling them outside the city into an unclean place.
They shall also scrape off the house inside round about, and they will pour out the plaster soil which they have scraped off outside the city into an unclean place.
Then they will take other stones and insert them instead of the stones, and other soil shall they take and plaster the house.
Now if the contagion should return and bud in the house after one pulled off the stones, after scraping off the house and after it is plastered,
then the priest will come and examine, and behold, if the contagion has diffused in the house, it is a festering leprous mold in the house; it is unclean.
Hence they will tear down the house, its stones and its timbers and all the plaster soil of the house, and will bring them forth outside the city to an unclean place.
Anyone entering the house all the days while they locked it, shall be unclean until the evening;
and anyone lying in the house shall rinse his garments; also anyone eating in the house shall rinse his garments.
Yet if the priest should come, yea come and examine, and behold, if the contagion has not diffused in the house after the house was plastered, then the priest will pronounce the house clean, for the contagion is mended.
To expiate the house he will take two birds, also cedar wood, double-dipped crimson yarn and hyssop.
He will slay one bird in an earthenware vessel over live water;
and he will take the cedar wood, the hyssop, the double-dipped crimson yarn and the living bird and dip them into the blood of the slain bird and in the live water and spatter it on the house seven times.
Thus he will expiate the house with the blood of the bird, with the live water, with the living bird, with the cedar wood, with the hyssop and with the double-dipped crimson yarn.
Then he will send the living bird free outside the city over the surface of the field and make a propitiatory shelter over the house; then it will be clean.
This is the law for every contagion of leprous disease and for the scall;
for leprous mold in a garment and on a house;
for a nodule, for scurf and for blotches,
to direct about the day of the unclean and about the day of the clean. This is the law of leprous disease.
YHVH spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them: In case any man should come to be discharging from his flesh, his discharge, it is unclean.
This shall become the law of his uncleanness in his discharge. Whether his flesh oozes his discharge or seals his flesh from his discharge, he is unclean all the days of the discharge of his flesh or when it seals his flesh from his discharge; it is his uncleanness.
Any bedding on which the one discharging has lain is unclean; and every article on which he has sat is unclean.
Anyone who touches his bedding shall rinse his garments and bathe in water and be unclean until the evening.
Also the one sitting on an article on which the one discharging has sat shall rinse his garments and bathe in water and be unclean until the evening.
And the one touching the flesh of the one discharging shall rinse his garments and bathe in water and be unclean until the evening.
In case the one discharging should spit on one who is clean, then he will rinse his garments and bathe in water and be unclean until the evening.
Every saddle on which the one discharging should ride is unclean;
and anyone touching anything that came to be beneath him is unclean until the evening. Even the one carrying them shall rinse his garments and bathe in water and be unclean until the evening.
Everyone whom the one discharging should touch, without having laved his hands in water, will rinse his garments and bathe in water and be unclean until the evening.
Any article of earthenware which the one discharging has touched shall be broken, and every article of wood shall be laved in water.
When the one discharging is clean from his discharge he will count off for himself seven days for his cleansing and will rinse his garments and bathe his flesh in live water and be clean.
On the eighth day he shall take for himself two turtledoves or two dove squabs and will come before YHVH to the opening of the tent of appointment and give them to the priest.
Then the priest will make of them, one a sin offering and the other an ascent offering. Thus the priest will make a propitiatory shelter over him before YHVH because of his discharge.
A man, when an emission of semen comes forth from him, will bathe all his flesh in water and be unclean until the evening.
Every garment and all leather on which his emission of semen has come, he will rinse in water, and it will be unclean until the evening.
Also a woman with whom a man is lying with an emission of semen, they will both bathe in water and be unclean until the evening.
When a woman comes to be discharging and her discharge in her flesh be blood, seven days shall she come to be in her period, and anyone touching her is unclean until the evening.
Everything on which she has lain during her period is unclean, and everything on which she has sat is unclean.
Anyone touching her bedding shall rinse his garments and bathe in water and be unclean until the evening;
and anyone touching any article on which she has sat shall rinse his garments and bathe in water and be unclean until the evening.
Whether it was on the bedding or on the article on which she was sitting when he touched it, he is unclean until the evening.
If a man should lie, yea lie with her, and her period should come on him, then he will be unclean seven days; and any bedding on which he has lain is unclean.
In case a woman discharges a discharge of her blood many days, not in the season of her period, or in case she discharges beyond her period, all the days of the discharge of her uncleanness shall she come to be as in the days of her period; she is unclean.
Any bedding on which she has lain all the days of her discharge, as the bedding of her period shall it become to her, and any article on which she has sat shall become unclean as during the uncleanness of her period.
Anyone touching them shall be unclean; he will rinse his garments and bathe in water and be unclean until the evening.
When she is clean from her discharge then she will count off for herself seven days, and afterward she is clean.
On the eighth day she shall take for herself two turtledoves or two dove squabs and bring them to the priest, to the opening of the tent of appointment.
Then the priest will make of the one a sin offering and of the other an ascent offering. Thus the priest will make a propitiatory shelter over her before YHVH because of the discharge of her uncleanness.
You will warn the sons of Israel against their uncleanness so that they may not die in their uncleanness when they defile My tabernacle which is in their midst.
This is the law for the one discharging and from whom is coming forth an emission of semen to be unclean by it;
also for the menstruous one in her period, as well as for the one discharging with his discharge, for the male as for the female, and for the man who is lying with her who is unclean.
YHVH spoke to Moses after the death of the two sons of Aaron when they came near before YHVH and died.
YHVH said to Moses: Speak to Aaron your brother that he must not come at just any time into the holy place, inside the curtain before the propitiatory shelter which is on the coffer so that he may not die, for in the cloud shall I appear over the propitiatory shelter.
In this way shall Aaron come into the holy place: with a young bull, the calf of the herd, as a sin offering, and a ram as an ascent offering.
The holy linen tunic shall he put on, and linen breeches shall be over his flesh, and with a linen sash shall he gird himself, and with a linen turban shall he be turbaned; they are holy garments. He will bathe his flesh in water and put them on.
From the congregation of the sons of Israel shall he take two hairy goats as a sin offering and one ram as an ascent offering.
Aaron will bring near the young bull of the sin offering which is for himself, and he will make a propitiatory shelter about himself and about his house.
He will take the two hairy goats and stand them before YHVH at the opening of the tent of appointment.
Then Aaron will cast lots over the two hairy goats, one lot for YHVH and one lot for the goat of departure.
Aaron will bring near the hairy goat over which the lot for YHVH comes up and make it a sin offering.
Yet the hairy goat over which the lot for the goat of departure comes up shall stay alive before YHVH to make a propitiatory shelter over it and to send it away as the goat of departure to the wilderness.
Aaron will bring near the young bull of the sin offering which is for him, and make a propitiatory shelter about himself and about his house. He will slay the young bull of the sin offering which is for himself.
Then he will take a full fire-pan of embers of fire off the altar from before YHVH and both his hands full of thin incense spices and bring it inside the curtain;
he will put the incense on the fire before YHVH, and the cloud of incense will cover the propitiatory shelter which is on the testimony, so that he may not die.
He will take some of the blood of the young bull and spatter it with his finger on the face of the propitiatory shelter eastward, and before the propitiatory shelter shall he spatter some of the blood seven times with his finger.
He will slay the hairy goat of the sin offering which is for the people, and bring its blood inside the curtain and do with its blood just as he did with the blood of the young bull, and spatter it on the propitiatory shelter and before the propitiatory shelter.
Thus he will make a propitiatory shelter over the holy place because of the uncleannesses of the sons of Israel and because of their transgressions, for all their sins. So shall he do for the tent of appointment that is tabernacling with them in the midst of their uncleannesses.
No human at all shall come to be in the tent of appointment when he enters to make a propitiatory shelter in the holy place until his coming forth. He will make a propitiatory shelter about himself and about his household and about the whole assembly of Israel.
Then he will come forth to the altar which is before YHVH and make a propitiatory shelter over it. He will take some of the blood of the young bull and some of the blood of the hairy goat and put it on the horns of the altar round about.
He will spatter some of the blood on it with his finger seven times and cleanse it and hallow it from the uncleannesses of the sons of Israel.
When he has finished making a propitiatory shelter for the holy place and the tent of appointment and the altar, he will bring near the live hairy goat.
Aaron will support his two hands on the head of the live hairy goat, confess over it all the depravities of the sons of Israel and all their transgressions in all their sins and put them on the head of the hairy goat and send it away by the hand of a ready man to the wilderness.
Thus the hairy goat will bear on it all their depravities to an inaccessible land, and he will send the hairy goat free into the wilderness.
Then Aaron will enter the tent of appointment and strip off the linen garments which he put on when he came into the holy place, and he will leave them there.
He will bathe his flesh in water in a holy place, put on his garments, go forth, make his ascent offering and the ascent offering of the people and thus make a propitiatory shelter about himself and about the people.
The fat of the sin offering shall he cause to fume on the altar.
The one sending the hairy goat free as the goat of departure shall rinse his garments and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he may come into the camp.
As for the young bull of the sin offering and the hairy goat of the sin offering, whose blood was brought to make a propitiatory shelter in the holy place, one shall bring them forth outside the camp, and they will burn with fire their hides and their flesh and their dung.
The one burning them shall rinse his garments and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he may come into the camp.
It will come to be for you as an eonian statute: in the seventh month on the eighth of the month you shall humble your souls, and no work at all shall you do, the native or the sojourner sojourning in your midst.
For on this day shall one make a propitiatory shelter over you to cleanse you from all your sins. Before YHVH shall you be clean.
It is a sabbath of cessation for you, and you will humble your souls; it is an eonian statute.
The priest whom one is anointing and whose hands one is filling to serve as priest instead of his father, will make a propitiatory shelter. He will put on the linen garments, the holy garments,
and make a propitiatory shelter over the holy sanctuary. Over the tent of appointment and the altar shall he make a propitiatory shelter; over the priests and over all the people of the assembly shall he make a propitiatory shelter.
This will come to be for you as an eonian statute to make a propitiatory shelter over the sons of Israel because of all their sins, once a year. And he did just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to Aaron and to his sons and to all the sons of Israel and say to them: This is the thing which YHVH has instructed, saying,
Any man from the house of Israel who slays a bull or a sheep or a goat in the camp, or who slays it outside the camp,
and does not bring it to the opening of the tent of appointment so as to bring it near as an approach present to YHVH before the tabernacle of YHVH, bloodshed shall be accounted to that man. He has shed blood; hence that man will be cut off from among his people.
This is in order that the sons of Israel may bring their sacrifices which they have been sacrificing on the surface of the field that they bring them before YHVH, to the priest at the opening of the tent of appointment, and sacrifice them as sacrifices of peace offerings to YHVH.
Then the priest will sprinkle the blood against the altar of YHVH at the opening of the tent of appointment, and he will cause the fat to fume as a fragrant odor to YHVH.
No longer shall they sacrifice their sacrifices to hairy goat-demons after whom they have been prostituting. An eonian statute shall this become for them throughout their generations.
To them you shall say: Any man from the house of Israel or from the sojourners who sojourn in your midst who should offer an ascent offering or a sacrifice
and not bring it to the opening of the tent of appointment to offer it to YHVH, that man will be cut off from his kinsmen.
As for any man from the house of Israel and from the sojourners sojourning in your midst who should eat any blood, I will set My face against the soul eating blood, and I will cut him off from among his people,
for the soul of the flesh, it is in the blood, and I Myself have assigned it to you to make a propitiatory shelter over your souls on the altar; for the blood, in the soul it makes a propitiatory shelter.
Therefore I say to the sons of Israel: No soul at all of you shall eat blood; nor shall the sojourner sojourning in your midst eat blood.
Any man from the sons of Israel and from the sojourners sojourning in your midst who hunt a game animal or a flyer which may be eaten will pour out its blood and cover it with soil,
for the soul of all flesh is its blood; as its soul is it. So I said to the sons of Israel: The blood of any flesh you shall not eat, for the soul of all flesh, it is its blood. Everyone eating it shall be cut off.
Any soul who eats a carcass or an animal torn to pieces, whether a native or a sojourner, will rinse his garments and bathe in water and be unclean until the evening; then he will be clean.
Yet if he should not rinse his garments and not bathe his flesh then he will bear his depravity.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, I, YHVH, am your God.
According to the deeds of the land of Egypt in which you dwelt, you shall not behave. And according to the deeds of the land of Canaan where I am bringing you, you shall not behave; and by their statutes you shall not walk.
My judgments shall you keep, and My statutes shall you observe to walk by them: I, YHVH, am your God.
You will observe My statutes and My judgments, for the human who does them will also live by them: I am YHVH.
Not any one of you shall come near any kin of his flesh to expose their nakedness: I am YHVH.
The nakedness of your father and the nakedness of your mother you shall not expose. She is your mother; you shall not expose her nakedness.
The nakedness of your father's wife you shall not expose. It is the nakedness of your father.
The nakedness of your sister, the daughter of your father or the daughter of your mother, begotten at home or begotten outside, you shall not expose their nakedness.
The nakedness of your son's daughter, or your daughter's daughter, you shall not expose their nakedness, for they are your nakedness.
The nakedness of your father's wife's daughter, begotten by your father, you shall not expose. She is your sister; you shall not expose her nakedness.
The nakedness of your father's sister you shall not expose, for she is kin of your father.
The nakedness of your mother's sister you shall not expose, for she is the kin of your mother.
The nakedness of your father's brother you shall not expose; that is, to his wife you shall not approach; she is your aunt.
The nakedness of your daughter-in-law you shall not expose. She is the wife of your son; you shall not expose her nakedness.
The nakedness of your brother's wife you shall not expose. She is the nakedness of your brother.
The nakedness of both a woman and her daughter you shall not expose. Her son's daughter and her daughter's daughter you shall not take to expose her nakedness. They are kin. This is lewdness.
And you shall not take a wife in addition to her sister to distress her, by exposing her nakedness to her in her life time.
To a woman in the period of her uncleanness you shall not approach to expose her nakedness.
And to the wife of your companion you shall not give your emission of semen, to be unclean with her.
You shall not give any of your seed to make them pass through fire to Moloch, for you shall not profane the name of your God: I am YHVH.
With a male you shall not lie as if going to bed with a woman. This is an abhorrence.
You shall not give your emission to any beast to be unclean with it. And a woman shall not stand before a beast to copulate with it. This is decadence.
Do not defile yourselves in any of these ways. For in all of these the nations which I am dismissing before your face are defiled.
Since the land is unclean I shall visit its depravity on it, and the land shall vomit out its dwellers.
As for you, you will observe My statutes and My judgments, and not do any of these abhorrences, either the native or the sojourner sojourning in your midst
(for the men of the land who were before you have done all these abhorrences, and the land is unclean),
so that the land shall not vomit you out when you defile it, just as it vomited out the nations which were before you.
For anyone who shall do any of these abhorrences, the souls doing them will be cut off from among their people.
Hence you will keep My charge by no means to do any of the abhorrent habitual statutes which were practiced before you so that you may not defile yourselves by them: I, YHVH, am your God.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the whole congregation of the sons of Israel and say to them: Holy shall you become, for I am holy, YHVH your God.
Each of you shall fear his mother and his father, and observe My sabbaths: I, YHVH, am your God.
Do not turn around to the forbidden idols; and molten God you shall not make for yourselves: I, YHVH, am your God.
When you sacrifice a sacrifice of peace offerings to YHVH, you should sacrifice it for acceptance on your behalf.
On the day of your sacrifice shall it be eaten or on the morrow, and what is left until the third day shall be burned with fire.
Yet if it be eaten, yea eaten on the third day, it is vile; it shall not be accepted.
Its eater shall bear his depravity, for what is holy to YHVH has he profaned; hence that soul will be cut off from his kinsmen.
When you reap the harvest of your land you shall not finish the edges of your field in reaping, and the gleaning of your harvest you shall not glean.
Also your vineyard you shall not clean glean, and the loose berries of your vineyard you shall not glean; you shall forsake them for the humble and for the sojourner: I, YHVH, am your God.
You shall not steal nor dissimulate nor deal falsely, each one with his companion.
And you shall not swear by My name falsely and so profane the name of your God: I am YHVH.
You shall not extort from your associate, nor shall you pillage. The wage of a hireling shall not lodge with you until morning.
You shall not maledict the deaf, and before the blind you shall not put a stumbling block. You will fear your God: I am YHVH.
You shall not do iniquity in judgment; you shall not lift up the face of the poor nor honor the face of the great. In righteousness shall you judge your companion.
You shall not go about as a defamer among your kinsmen; you shall not stand against the blood of your associate: I am YHVH.
You shall not hate your brother in your heart. You shall admonish, yea admonish your companion so that you may not bear sin with him.
You shall not avenge nor shall you be resentful against the sons of your people. You will love your associate as yourself: I am YHVH.
My statutes shall you observe: your beast you shall not cause to copulate dissimilarly; your field you shall not sow dissimilarly, and a garment dissimilarly made of linsey-woolsey shall not come up on you.
In case a man who lies with a woman has an emission of semen when she is a bondmaid designated for another man, yet has not been ransomed, yea ransomed nor freedom given to her, a distinction shall there be: they shall not be put to death since she was not freed.
He will bring his guilt offering to YHVH at the opening of the tent of appointment: a ram as a guilt offering.
Then the priest will make a propitiatory shelter over him with the ram of the guilt offering before YHVH, for his sin with which he has sinned, and his sin with which he has sinned will be pardoned him.
When you shall come into the land and you plant any tree for food, then you will regard its foreskin as uncircumcised; that is, its fruit, for three years shall it be as uncircumcised to you. It shall not be eaten.
Yet in the fourth year all its fruit shall become holy, as praise offerings to YHVH.
And in the fifth year shall you eat its fruit so as to increase its yield to you still more: I, YHVH, am your God.
You shall not eat on the mountains. You shall not augur nor consult clouds.
You shall not round off the edge of your head's hair nor ruin the edge of your beard.
You shall not put a laceration in your flesh for a deceased soul; you shall not put a tattoo writing on yourself: I, YHVH, am your God.
Do not profane your daughter to make her a cult-prostitute that the land may not prostitute itself and the land be full of lewdness.
Instead, My sabbaths shall you observe, and My sanctuary shall you fear: I am YHVH.
Do not countenance mediums and wizards; do not seek them out to be defiled by them: I, YHVH am your God.
In the presence of the greyhaired shall you rise and honor the face of the old. You will fear your God: I am YHVH.
When a sojourner sojourns with you in your land, you shall not tyrannize over him.
As a native among you shall the sojourner sojourning with you come to be to you, and you will love him as yourself, for sojourners were you in the land of Egypt: I, YHVH, am your God.
You shall not do iniquity in judgment of standards in measure, in weight or in quantity.
Just scales, just stone weights, a just ephah and a just hin shall you come to have: I, YHVH, am your God Who brought you forth from the land of Egypt.
Hence you will observe all My statutes and all My judgments and do them: I am YHVH.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
To the sons of Israel you shall say, Any man of the sons of Israel and of the sojourners sojourning in Israel who should give any of his seed to Moloch shall be put to death, yea death. The people of the land shall pelt him with stones;
I Myself shall set My face against that man and will cut him off from among his people (for he has given of his seed to Moloch) on account of the defilement of My sanctuary and the profanation of My holy name.
And if the people of the land should obscure, yea obscure their eyes from that man when he gives of his seed to Moloch, so as to avoid putting him to death,
then I Myself will set My face against that man and against his family and will cut off from among their people him and all those prostituting after him, to prostitute after Moloch.
As for the soul who should countenance mediums and wizards to prostitute after them, I will set My face against that soul also and cut him off from among his people.
Hence sanctify yourselves and become holy, for I, YHVH, am your God.
You will observe My statutes and keep them: I am YHVH Who is hallowing you.
For any man who shall maledict his father or his mother shall be put to death, yea death. It is his father and his mother whom he maledicts; his blood-guilt will be on him.
As for a man who commits sexual perversion with another man's wife one who commits sexual perversion with his associate's wife the sexual pervert and the sexual pervertess shall be put to death, yea death.
As for a man who lies with his father's wife, he has exposed his father's nakedness. The two of them shall be put to death, yea death; their bloodguilt will be on them.
And a man who lies with his daughter-in-law, the two of them shall be put to death, yea death. They have shown decadence; their bloodguilt will be on them.
As for a man who lies with a male as if going to bed with a woman, they do an abhorrence. The two of them shall be put to death, yea death; their bloodguilt will be on them.
As for a man who takes a woman and her mother, this is lewdness. With fire shall they burn him and them so that no such lewdness may come up in your midst.
As for a man who gives his emission to a beast, he shall be put to death, yea death, and the beast shall you kill.
As for a woman who approaches to any beast to copulate with it, you will kill the woman and the beast. They shall be put to death, yea death; their bloodguilt will be on them.
As for a man who takes his sister, the daughter of his father or the daughter of his mother, and sees her nakedness, and she sees his nakedness, this is a base thing, and they will be cut off before the eyes of the sons of their people. The nakedness of his sister has he exposed; his depravity shall he bear.
As for a man who lies with a menstruous woman and exposes her nakedness, he causes her fountain to be naked, and she exposes the fountain of her blood-flows. Then the two of them will be cut off from among their people.
The nakedness of your mother's sister or your father's sister you shall not expose, for he who does so causes his kin to be naked; their depravity shall they bear.
As for a man who lies with his aunt, the nakedness of his uncle he has exposed. Their sin shall they bear; heirless shall they die.
As for a man who takes the wife of his brother, this is impurity. The nakedness of his brother has he exposed; heirless shall they become.
You shall observe all My statutes and all My judgments and keep them so that the land, where I am bringing you to dwell in it, shall not vomit you out.
You shall not walk by the habitual statutes of the nations which I am casting out from your presence, for they have practiced all these things, and I am irritated with them.
Yet I said to you: You shall tenant their ground, and I Myself shall give it to you to tenant it, a land gushing with milk and honey. I, YHVH, am your God, Who separates you from the peoples.
Hence you will make a separation between the clean beast and the unclean and between the unclean flyer and the clean; and you shall not make your souls abominable by a beast or by a flyer or by anything that moves on the ground which I have separated for you to consider it unclean.
So you will become holy to Me, for I, YHVH, am holy, and I am separating you from the peoples to become Mine.
A man or a woman, in case there is a medium or a wizard among them, they shall be put to death, yea death. With stones shall they pelt them; their bloodguilt is on them.
YHVH said to Moses: Speak to the priests, the sons of Aaron, and say to them: No one shall defile himself for a deceased soul among his kinsmen,
save for his kin next to him, that is, for his mother, for his father, for his son, for his daughter, for his brother
or for his virgin sister, next to him since she has not come to have a husband; for her he may defile himself.
He shall not defile himself for a possessor among his kinsmen and so profane himself.
They shall not make bald a tonsure on their heads for a dead one and not shave off the edge of their beard; nor shall they lacerate their flesh with laceration.
Holy shall they become to their God; they shall not profane the name of their God. Because they are bringing near the fire offerings of YHVH, the bread of their God, they are to be holy.
A prostituting woman or a violated one, they shall not take, and a woman driven out from her husband they shall not take, for he is holy to his God.
You will regard him as holy, for he is bringing near the bread of your God. He shall become holy to you, for I am holy, YHVH Who is hallowing you.
In case the daughter of a priestly man should profane herself by prostitution, she is profaning her father; with fire shall she be burned.
As for the priest, the one greater than his brothers, on whose head the anointing oil was poured and who consecrated his hand to put on the garments, his head's hair he shall not dishevel, and his garments he shall not rip
nor to any dead soul shall he enter; even for his father or for his mother he shall not defile himself.
He shall not go forth from the sanctuary nor profane the sanctuary of his God, for the sequestration by the anointing oil of his God is on him: I am YHVH.
He shall take a wife in her virginity.
A widow or one driven out or violated or prostituting, these he shall not take, but rather a virgin from his kinsmen shall he take for a wife,
that he may not profane his seed among his kinsmen, for I, YHVH, am regarding him as holy.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to Aaron, saying, A man of your seed throughout their generations, in whom there is a blemish, he shall not approach to bring near the bread of his God.
For no man at all who has a blemish in him may approach: a blind man or one lame or disfigured or deformed
or a man in whom there is a crippled foot or a crippled hand
or who is hunchbacked or dwarfed or ulcerated in his eye or with eczema or tetter or a mashed testicle.
Any man of the seed of Aaron the priest, in whom there is a blemish, shall not come close to bring near the fire offerings of YHVH. Since a blemish is in him, he shall not come close to bring near the bread of his God.
He may eat the bread of his God, of the holy of holies and of the holy things.
Only he shall not come to the curtain, nor shall he come close to the altar, for there is a blemish in him. He shall not profane My sanctuaries, for I, YHVH, am hallowing them.
Then Moses spoke this to Aaron and to his sons and to all the sons of Israel.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to Aaron and to his sons, that they should sequester themselves from the holy things of the sons of Israel which they are sanctifying to Me so that they may not profane My holy Name: I am YHVH.
Say to them: Throughout your generations, every man of all your seed who is coming near to the holy things which the sons of Israel are sanctifying to YHVH, when his uncleanness is on him, that soul will be cut off from My presence: I am YHVH.
Any man of the seed of Aaron, when he is a leprous man or has a discharge, he may not eat of the holy things until he be clean. As for the one touching any unclean soul, or a man from whom an emission of semen comes forth,
or a man who touches any swarmer which is unclean to him or a human who is unclean to him because of any uncleanness on him,
the soul who touches it also will be unclean until the evening and may not eat of the holy things unless he bathes his flesh in water.
When the sun sets he will be clean, and afterward he may eat of the holy things, for it is his bread.
A carcass or animal torn to pieces he shall not eat so as to defile himself by it: I am YHVH.
Hence they will My charge so that they shall not bear sin on its account and die by it, in case they should violate it: I, YHVH, am hallowing them.
Nor shall any alien eat the holy thing; that is, a priest's guest or hireling shall not eat the holy thing.
Yet when a priest buys a soul, an acquisition with his silver, he may eat of it; also his homeborn, they may eat of his bread.
In case a daughter of a priest comes to have an alien husband, she may not eat of the heave offering of the holy things.
Yet in case the daughter of the priest becomes a widow or is driven out and she has no seed and so she returns to the house of her father as in her youth, of her father's bread she may eat, yet no alien at all may eat of it.
And in case someone eats a holy thing inadvertently then he shall add a fifth of its value to it and restitute the holy thing to the priest.
They shall not profane the holy things of the sons of Israel which they are raising up to YHVH
and cause them to bear the depravity of guilt when they eat their holy things for I, YHVH, am hallowing them.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to Aaron and to his sons and to all the sons of Israel and say to them, When any man of the house of Israel or of the sojourners sojourning in Israel, brings near his approach present for all their vows and for all their voluntary offerings which they may bring near to YHVH for an ascent offering
for acceptance on your behalf, it has to be a flawless male of the herd, of the sheep or of the goats.
Any in which there is a blemish you shall not bring near seeing that it shall not be for acceptance on your behalf.
When a man brings near a sacrifice of peace offerings to YHVH to make an extraordinary vow or as a voluntary offering of the herd or of the flock, flawless shall it be for acceptance; no blemish at all shall be in it.
Blind or crippled or gashed or with an ulcer or eczema or tetter, you shall not bring these near to YHVH, nor as a fire offering shall you offer of them on the altar to YHVH.
As for a bull or a flockling deformed or stunted you may offer it as a voluntary offering, yet for a vow it shall not be accepted.
And one with testicles squashed or pounded to pieces or pulled away or cut out you shall not bring near to YHVH. You shall not do this in your own land,
nor shall you bring near as the bread of your God of any of these animals acquired from the hand of a foreigner's son. Since their ruin is in them, and a blemish is in them, they shall not be accepted on your behalf.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
When a bull or a sheep or a goat is born then it will come to be seven days under its mother; from the eighth day and beyond it may be accepted as an approach present of a fire offering to YHVH.
As for a bull or a flockling, it and its young you shall not slay in one day.
And in case you should sacrifice an acclamation sacrifice to YHVH, for acceptance on your behalf shall you sacrifice it.
On the same day shall it be eaten; you shall not leave any of it until the morning: I am YHVH.
Hence observe My instructions and keep them: I am YHVH.
You shall not profane My holy name, so that I be hallowed in the midst of the sons of Israel. I am YHVH Who is hallowing you,
Who brought you forth from the land of Egypt to be your God: I am YHVH.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, The appointed seasons of YHVH, those which you shall proclaim holy meetings; My appointed seasons, they are these:
Six days shall work be done, yet on the seventh day there shall be a sabbath of cessation, a holy meeting. You shall do no work at all. This is a sabbath to YHVH in all your dwellings.
These are the appointed seasons of YHVH, the holy meetings, those which you shall proclaim at their appointed time:
In the first month on the fourteenth day of the month between the evening hours, is the passover to YHVH.
And on the fifteenth day of this month is the celebration of unleavened cakes to YHVH. Seven days shall you eat unleavened cakes.
On the first day you shall come to have a holy meeting, when you shall do no occupational work at all.
And you shall bring near a fire offering to YHVH seven days. On the seventh day is a holy meeting, when you shall do no occupational work at all.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, When you come into the land which I am giving to you and reap its harvest, you will bring a sheaf of the firstfruit of your harvest to the priest.
He will wave the sheaf before YHVH for acceptance on your behalf. From the morrow after the first sabbath the priest shall wave it.
On the day when you cause the sheaf to wave you will offer a flawless year-old he-lamb as an ascent offering to YHVH,
together with its approach present of two tenths of an ephah of flour mingled with oil, a fire offering to YHVH, a fragrant odor, and its libation of wine, a fourth of a hin.
No bread or toasted grain or groats of the crop shall you eat until this very day, until you bring the approach present of your God. It shall be an eonian statute throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
You will count off for yourselves after the first sabbath, from the day you bring the sheaf of the wave offering: there shall be seven flawless sabbaths.
Until the seventh sabbath you shall count off fifty days; then you will bring near an approach present of new grain to YHVH.
From your dwellings shall you bring bread as a wave offering: two loaves, of two tenths of an ephah of flour shall they be; baked with leaven shall they be, as firstfruits for YHVH.
And you will bring near with the bread seven flawless year-old he-lambs, and one young bull calf of the herd and two flawless rams. They shall be an ascent offering to YHVH together with their approach present and their libations, a fire offering of fragrant odor to YHVH.
And you will offer one hairy goat as a sin offering and two year-old he-lambs as a sacrifice of peace offerings.
Then the priest will wave them with the bread of the firstfruits as a wave offering before YHVH with the two he-lambs. Holy shall they be to YHVH for the priest.
And you will proclaim a meeting on this very day. It shall be holy for you. You shall do no occupational work at all; it shall be an eonian statute in all your dwellings throughout your generations.
When you reap the harvest of your land you shall not finish the edges of your field when you reap, and the gleaning of your harvest you shall not glean. For the humble and for the sojourner shall you forsake them: I, YHVH, am your God.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, In the seventh month on day one of the month there shall be a cessation for you with a memorial trumpet blasting, a holy meeting.
You shall do no occupational work at all and shall bring near a fire offering to YHVH.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Then on the eighth of this seventh month, it is the day of propitiatory shelters. It shall be a holy meeting for you, and you will humble your souls and bring near a fire offering to YHVH.
You shall do no work at all on this very day, for it the day of propitiatory shelters so as to make a propitiatory shelter over you before YHVH your God.
For every soul who is not humbled on this very day will be cut off from his kinsmen.
And every soul who does any work on this very day, I will destroy that soul from among his people.
You shall do no work at all. It is an eonian statute throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
It is a sabbath of cessation for you, and you will humble your souls. On the seventh day of the month in the evening, from evening until evening shall you cease for your sabbath.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, From the fifteenth day of this seventh month is the celebration of booths seven days to YHVH.
On the first day is a holy meeting; you shall do no occupational work at all.
Seven days shall you bring near a fire offering to YHVH and on the eighth day there shall be a holy meeting for you, and you will bring near a fire offering to YHVH. It is a day of restraint. You shall do no occupational work at all.
These are the appointed seasons of YHVH, those which you shall proclaim as holy meetings, to bring near the fire offering to YHVH, the ascent offering and the approach present, the sacrifice and the libations, each day's matter in its day,
aside from the sabbaths of YHVH and aside from your gifts and aside from all your vows and aside from all your voluntary offerings which you shall give to YHVH.
On the fifteenth day of the seventh month after you have gathered the yield of the land, you shall celebrate the celebration of YHVH for seven days. On the first day there is a cessation and on the eighth day a cessation.
You will take for yourselves on the first day fruit of goodly trees, fronds of palms and boughs of leafy trees, and oleanders of the watercourse, and you will rejoice before YHVH your God for seven days.
You will celebrate it as a celebration to YHVH for seven days in the year. It shall be an eonian statute throughout your generations. In the seventh month shall you celebrate it.
In booths shall you dwell seven days, that is, every native in Israel; they shall dwell in booths
that your generations may know that in booths I made the sons of Israel dwell when I brought them forth from the land of Egypt: I, YHVH, am your God.
Thus Moses spoke of the appointed seasons of YHVH to the sons of Israel.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Instruct the sons of Israel that they should take to you clear olive oil, pounded, for the luminary, to kindle the lamp regularly.
Outside the curtain of the testimony in the tent of appointment Aaron and his sons shall arrange it from evening until morning before YHVH regularly. It shall be an eonian statute throughout your generations.
On the pure lampstand shall he arrange the lamps before YHVH regularly.
You will take flour and bake of it twelve perforated cakes. Two tenths of an ephah shall there be for one perforated cake.
And you will place them in two arrays, six to the array, on the pure table before YHVH.
You will put along each array clear frankincense, and it will be used instead of the bread as a memorial portion, a fire offering to YHVH.
Sabbath day by sabbath day shall he arrange it before YHVH regularly on behalf of the sons of Israel, an eonian covenant.
It will be for Aaron and for his sons, and they will eat it in a holy place, for it is a holy of holies for him from the fire offerings of YHVH. It is an eonian statute.
The son of an Israelitish woman (he was the son of an Egyptian man) had come forth in the midst of the sons of Israel. Now the son of the Israelitess and an Israelite man strove together in the camp,
and the son of the Israelite woman blasphemed the name of YHVH, and he maledicted it. So they brought him to Moses. (Now the name of his mother was Shelomith daughter of Dibri of the stock of Dan.)
They left him under guard until Moses expounded the case for them at the bidding of YHVH.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Bring forth the maledictor outside the camp, and all the hearers will support their hands on his head, and the whole congregation will pelt him with stones.
And to the sons of Israel shall you speak, saying: In case any man maledicts his God, then he will bear his own sin:
The blasphemer of the name of YHVH shall be put to death, yea death. The whole congregation shall pelt, yea pelt him with stones. The sojourner as well as the native; when he blasphemes the Name, he shall be put to death.
In case a man smites any human soul so that he dies, he shall be put to death, yea death.
And the smiter of the soul of a beast shall repay it soul for soul.
In case a man gives a blemish to his companion, just as he did so shall it be done to him:
Fracture for fracture, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, just as he gives a blemish to a human so shall it be given to him.
The smiter of a beast shall repay for it, but the smiter of a human shall be put to death.
The same judgment shall you come to have; for the sojourner as well as the native shall it be: for I, YHVH, am your God.
Thus Moses spoke to the sons of Israel, and they brought forth the maledictor outside the camp and pelted him with stones. So the sons of Israel did just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
YHVH spoke to Moses on mount Sinai, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them: When you come into the land that I am giving to you, the land will pause for a sabbath to YHVH.
Six years shall you sow your field, and six years shall you prune your vineyard and gather its yield.
Yet in the seventh year there shall be a sabbath of cessation for the land, a sabbath to YHVH. Your field you shall not sow, and your vineyard you shall not prune;
The self-sown of your harvest you shall not reap, and the grapes of your untrimmed vines you shall not pick. A year of cessation shall it be for the land.
Yet the sabbath yield of the land you will come to have as food for you, for your servant and for your maidservant, for your hireling and for your guest, those sojourning with you,
for your domestic beast and for the wild animal which are in your land; all its yield shall be for eating.
You will count off for yourselves seven sabbaths of years, that is, seven years seven times, so that the days of the seven sabbaths of years will come to be for you forty-nine years.
Then you will make the trumpet blast pass over all your land in the seventh month on the eighth of the month. On the day of propitiatory shelters you shall make the trumpet pass over all your land.
And you will hallow the year, the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty in the land to all its dwellers. A jubilee year shall this one be for you; each of you will return to his holding, and each of you shall return to his family.
A jubilee year shall this one, the fiftieth year, be for you; you shall not sow nor shall you reap its self-sown, neither shall you pick its untrimmed vines,
for this is the jubilee. Holy shall it be for you: directly from the field you shall eat its yield.
In this year of the jubilee each of you shall return to his holding.
So in case you should sell land-use in a sale to your companion or buy it from the hand of your companion, you must not tyrannize, a man over his brother.
By the number of years after the jubilee shall you buy land-use from your companion. By the number of the years of yield shall he sell it to you.
Corresponding to the great number of years shall you increase its acquisition price, and corresponding to the few number of years shall you decrease its acquisition price, because it is the number of yields he is selling to you.
So you should not tyrannize, a man over his companion. You will fear your God: for I, YHVH, am your God.
Observe My statutes and My judgments; you shall guard yourselves and keep them; then you may dwell on the land in trust.
The land will give its fruit, and you will eat to satisfaction and dwell in trust on it.
Since you might say: What shall we eat in the seventh year? Behold, we may not sow nor gather our yield!
I will enjoin My blessing for you in the sixth year, and it will give the yield for three years.
While you sow in the eighth year you will eat from the yield in storage until the ninth year. Until its yield comes in you shall eat from the storage.
The land-use, it shall not be sold in perpetuity, for the land is Mine, since you are sojourners and guests with Me.
So with all your holding of land, a redemption shall you give for the land.
In case your brother is reduced to poverty and sells use of some of his holding, then his redeemer, one near to him, will come and redeem his brother's sold land-use.
And in case a man comes to have no redeemer yet his own hand can afford it so that he finds sufficient means for its redemption,
then he will compute the years of its sale and restore the superfluity to the man to whom he sold it; then he will return to his holding.
Yet if he does not find his means sufficient to restore it to him then his sold land-use will come into the hand of the one buying it until the year of the jubilee. Then it will come forth in the jubilee, and he will return to his holding.
In case a man sells a dwelling house in a walled city then his right of redemption will come to be until the end of the year after its sale; only in these days will his right of redemption come to be.
Yet if it should not be redeemed until its full year has come to end, then the house (which is in the city that has walls) will belong in perpetuity to the one buying it throughout his generations; it shall not come forth in the jubilee.
Yet the houses of the hamlets, which have no wall round about, shall be reckoned along with the fields of the land. Redemption shall come for it, and in the jubilee it shall come forth.
Yet for the cities of the Levites, the houses of the cities of their holdings, redemption shall be eonian for Levites.
When one from the Levites redeems, then the sold house, his city holding, will come forth in the jubilee, for the houses of the Levitical cities, these are their holdings in the midst of the sons of Israel.
Yet the use of the common field of their cities may not be sold, for it is an eonian holding for them.
In case your brother is reduced to poverty, and his hand slips beside you, then make him steadfast as if he were sojourner or guest, so that your brother may live beside you.
Do not take advance interest or accrued interest from him. You will fear your God, so that your brother be alive beside you.
Your silver you shall not give to him on advance interest, nor give your food on accrued interest:
I, YHVH, am your God, Who brought you forth from the land of Egypt to give to you the land of Canaan, so as to be your God.
In case your brother who is beside you is reduced to poverty and sells himself to you, you shall not make him serve the service of a servant.
As a hireling, as a guest shall he be beside you; until the year of the jubilee shall he serve for you.
Then he will go forth from you, he and his sons with him, and return to his family; and to the holding of his fathers shall he return.
For they are My servants, whom I brought forth from the land of Egypt. They shall not sell themselves as in servant sales.
You shall not hold sway over him with rigor: you will fear your God.
As for your servants and your maidservants who become yours from the nations which are round about you, from them you may buy servants or maidservants.
Also from the sons of guests sojourning among you, from them you may buy and from their families who are among you, whom they begot in your land; they will belong to your holding.
You may entail them as an allotment to your sons after you together with the tenancy of the holding. For the eon you may make them serve. Yet over your brothers, the sons of Israel, a man over his brother, you shall not hold sway over them with rigor.
In case the hand of a sojourner or guest beside you can afford it, and your brother beside him is reduced to poverty and sells himself to the sojourner or guest beside you or to the offspring of the sojourner's family,
after he has sold himself, redemption may he come to have: one of his brothers may redeem him.
Either his uncle or his uncle's son may redeem him, or one, kin to his flesh, of his family may redeem him, or if his own hand can afford it then he may redeem himself.
He will compute with his buyer the total from the year he sold himself to him until the year of the jubilee. And the silver for his release sale will be with regard to the number of years, as though he were for the days of a hireling under him.
Should there still be many years, corresponding to them he shall refund for his redemption out of the silver of his buying price.
And if few years remain until the year of jubilee then he will compute the amount due to him corresponding to his remaining years, and he shall refund it for his redemption.
(As a hireling, year by year shall he be with him; he shall not hold sway over him with rigor before your eyes.)
If he is not being redeemed in any of these ways then he will go forth in the year of the jubilee, he and his sons with him.
For to Me the sons of Israel are servants; they are My servants whom I brought forth from the land of Egypt: I, YHVH, am your God.
You shall not make forbidden idols for yourselves, nor set up carvings and monuments for yourselves, nor put a stone picture in your land to bow yourself down before it, for I, YHVH, am your God.
Instead My sabbaths shall you observe, and My sanctuary shall you fear: I am YHVH.
If you walk by My statutes and observe My instructions and keep them,
then I will give your downpours in their season, and the land will give its crop, and the tree of the field shall give its fruit.
Your threshing will overtake the vintage, and the vintage, it shall overtake the sowing; you will eat your bread to satisfaction and dwell in trust in your land.
I will give peace in the land, and you will lie down with no one making you tremble; I will eradicate the vicious animal from the land, and no sword shall pass through your land.
You will pursue your enemies, and they will fall before you by the sword;
five of you will pursue a hundred, and a hundred of you shall pursue a myriad, and your enemies will fall before you by the sword.
I will countenance you, make you fruitful, increase you and confirm My covenant with you.
You will eat stored stores and bring forth the stores in view of the new.
I will put My tabernacle in your midst, and My soul shall not loathe you.
I will walk about in your midst and will be your God and you, you shall be My people.
I, YHVH, am your God Who brought you forth from the land of Egypt, from being servants to them. I have broken the slider bars of your yoke and enabled you to walk upraised.
Yet if you neither hearken to Me nor observe all these instructions,
and if you reject My statutes, and if your soul loathes My judgments so as not to observe all My instructions, to cause you to annul My covenant,
indeed, I Myself shall do this to you: I will visit panic upon you, attenuation and fever, making the eyesight vanish and causing the soul to pine; and you will sow your seed for naught, for your enemies will eat it.
I will set My face against you, and you will be struck down before your enemies; those hating you will hold sway over you, and you will flee even when there is no one pursuing you.
And if, after these things, you should not hearken to Me, then I will continue to discipline you sevenfold for your sins.
I will break the pomp of your strength and make your heavens like iron and your land like copper.
Your vigor will be spent for naught, and your land shall not give its crop, and the tree of the field shall not give its fruit.
If you go contrary to Me and are not willing to hearken to Me, then I will add smitings to you sevenfold according to your sins.
I will send the animal of the field against you, and it will bereave you, cut off your domestic beasts and so decrease you that your roads will be desolated.
If by these you should not be disciplined for Me and go contrary to Me,
then I will, indeed, go contrary to you, and I Myself will even smite you sevenfold for your sins.
I will bring the sword on you avenging the vengeance of the covenant. When you will be gathered into your cities then I will send the plague into your midst, and you will be given into the hand of the enemy.
When I break the stock of bread for you then ten women will bake your bread in one stove and return your bread by weight so that you will eat and not be satisfied.
If by this you should not hearken to Me and go contrary to Me,
then I will go contrary to you in fury. And I Myself, indeed, will discipline you sevenfold for your sins.
You will eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall you eat.
I will exterminate your fane heights, cut down your incense stands and bestow your corpses upon the corpses of your idol clods; thus My soul will loathe you.
I will turn your cities into a desert and make your sanctuary desolate; I shall not smell your fragrant odor.
I will make the land so desolate, that your enemies, the ones dwelling in it, will be dejected over it.
And you I shall winnow among the nations, and I will unsheathe a sword after you so that your land will become a desolation and your cities become a desert.
Then the land shall accept its sabbaths all the days of its desolation when you are in the land of your enemies. Then the land shall pause for a sabbath and cause its missing sabbaths to be accepted.
All the days of its desolation it shall pause for a sabbath, which days it did not pause in your sabbath years when you dwelt on it.
As for the remainder among you, I will also bring timidity into their heart in the lands of their enemies so that the sound of a leaf being whisked away will pursue them, and they will flee as if in flight from the sword; they will fall even when there is no one pursuing.
They will stumble, a man over his brother, as though in view of the sword when there is no pursuer, and you shall come to have no standing space before your enemies.
You will perish among the nations, and the land of your enemies will devour you.
The remainder among you shall be putrid over their depravity in the lands of your enemies, and also over the depravities of their fathers with them shall they be putrid.
If they will confess their depravity and the depravity of their fathers in their offense (when they had offended Me and, indeed, when they had gone contrary to Me
so that I Myself also went contrary to them and brought them into the land of their enemies), if then their uncircumcised heart should submit, and if then they should accept their depravity,
then I will remember My covenant with Jacob and also My covenant with Isaac; also My covenant with Abraham shall I remember, and the land shall I remember.
Yet the land, it shall be forsaken of them and shall accept its sabbath years while it is desolate without them, and they themselves shall accept their depravity because, yes because they had rejected My judgments and their soul had loathed My statutes.
Yet in spite of this, when they are in the land of their enemies I will not reject them nor loathe them so as to finish them, to annul My covenant with them, for I, YHVH, am their God.
For their benefit I will remember the covenant with the former ones whom I brought forth from the land of Egypt before the eyes of the nations to be their God; I am YHVH.
These are the statutes, the judgments and the laws which YHVH put between Him and the sons of Israel on Mount Sinai by means of Moses.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them: In case anyone makes an extraordinary vow to YHVH, involving your appraisal of human souls:
then your appraisal will be for the male from twenty years old unto sixty years old: your appraisal will be fifty shekels of silver, by the shekel of the holy place;
and if she is a female, then your appraisal will be thirty shekels.
If he is from five years old unto twenty years old then your appraisal will be: for the male twenty shekels, and for the female ten shekels.
If the person is from a month old unto five years old then your appraisal will be: for the male five shekels of silver, and for the female your appraisal will be three shekels of silver.
If the person is from sixty years old and upward, if a male, then your appraisal will be fifteen shekels and for a female ten shekels.
Yet if he is too reduced by poverty for your appraisal then one will stand him before the priest, and the priest will appraise him. Corresponding to what the vower's means can afford shall the priest appraise him.
If the vow involves a domestic beast from which they bring near an approach present to YHVH, all of what one gives to YHVH, it shall be holy.
He shall not exchange it nor substitute for it, a good for a bad one or a bad for a good one. And if he should substitute, yea substitute beast for beast, then it has become holy; both it and its substitute shall be holy.
If the vow involves any unclean beast of which they may not bring near an approach present to YHVH, then he will stand the beast before the priest,
and the priest will appraise it as good or bad; according to your appraisal, O priest, so shall it be.
If he should redeem, yea redeem it then he will add a fifth of its value over your appraisal.
In case a man sanctifies his house to be holy to YHVH, then the priest will appraise it between good and bad. Just as the priest appraises it, so much shall it cost.
And if the one sanctifying should redeem his house, then he will add a fifth of the silver of your appraisal to it, and it will become his.
If a man should sanctify part of a field of his holding to YHVH, then your appraisal will be corresponding to its seed, a homer of barley seed to fifty shekels of silver.
If he should sanctify his field from the year of the jubilee, according to your appraisal shall it cost.
Yet if he should sanctify his field after the jubilee, then the priest will compute the silver for him corresponding to the rest of the years until the year of the jubilee so a portion will be subtracted from your first appraisal.
And if the one sanctifying it should redeem, yea, redeem the field, then he will add a fifth of the silver of your appraisal to it, and it will belong to him.
But if he should not redeem the field or if he has sold the field to another man it shall not be redeemed again.
And the field, when it comes forth in the jubilee, will become holy to YHVH as a devoted field; it shall become the priest's holding.
Yet if it is a field of his acquisition, which is not a field of his holding which he sanctifies to YHVH,
then the priest will compute for him the assessment of your appraisal until the year of the jubilee; and he will pay your appraisal on that day as holy to YHVH.
In the year of the jubilee the field shall return to the one from whom he acquired it, to him whose holding the land is.
All of your appraisals shall be by the shekel of the holy place: twentieth of a gerah shall there be to a shekel.
However the firstborn among beasts which as firstborn is devoted to YHVH, no one may sanctify it; whether a bull or a flockling, it is already YHVH's.
Yet if it is among the unclean beasts, then he will ransom it by your appraisal and add to it a fifth of its value. Should it not be redeemed, then it will be sold by your appraisal.
Every devoted thing which a man may devote to YHVH, of all which is his of human and beast and of the field of his holding, it shall not be sold nor redeemed. Every devoted thing, it will be holy of holies to YHVH.
Every doomed one which is doomed of humanity shall not be ransomed; he shall be put to death, yea death.
As for all the tithe of the land, of the seed of the land and of the fruit of the tree, it is YHVH's; it is holy to YHVH.
And if a man should redeem, yea redeem any part of his tithe, a fifth of it shall he add to it.
All the tithe of the herd and the flock, all that passes under the club, a tenth shall become holy to YHVH;
he shall make no quest between good and bad nor substitute for it. And if he should substitute, yea substitute for it, then it has become holy; both it and its substitute shall be holy. It may not be redeemed.
These are the instructions with which YHVH instructed Moses for the sons of Israel on Mount Sinai.
YHVH spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the tent of appointment, on day one of the second month, in the second year of their going forth from the land of Egypt, saying:
Obtain the sum of the whole congregation of the sons of Israel: by their families, by their fathers' house with the number of names, every male by their skulls,
from twenty years old and upward, everyone going forth with the militia host in Israel. You shall muster them by their militia hosts, you and Aaron.
And with you shall come to be a man for each stock; each the head of his fathers' house shall he be.
These are the names of the men who shall stand with you: for Reuben, Elizur son of Shedeur;
for Simeon, Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai;
for Judah, Nahshon son of Amminadab;
for Issachar, Nathanael son of Zuar;
for Zebulun, Eliab son of Helon;
for the sons of Joseph: for Ephraim, Elishama son of Ammihud; for Manasseh, Gamaliel son of Pedahzur;
for Benjamin, Abidan son of Gideoni;
for Dan, Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai;
for Asher, Pagiel son of Ocran;
for Gad, Eliasaph son of Reuel;
for Naphtali, Ahida son of Enan.
These are the called of the congregation, princes of the stocks of their fathers; they are heads of thousands of Israel.
So Moses and Aaron took these men who were specified by their names.
And on day one of the second month they assembled the whole congregation, who registered themselves be genealogies: by their families, by their fathers' house with the number of names from twenty years old and upward, by their skulls.
Just as YHVH had instructed Moses, so he mustered them in the wilderness of Sinai.
And they came to be: For the sons of Reuben, firstborn of Israel, according to their genealogical records by their families, by their fathers' house with the number of names, by their skulls, every male from twenty years old and upward, everyone going forth with the militia host,
their mustered ones for the stock of Reuben were forty-six thousand five hundred.
For the sons of Simeon, according to their genealogical records by their families, by their fathers' house, their mustered ones with the number of names, by their skulls, every male from twenty years old and upward, everyone going forth with the militia host,
their mustered ones for the stock of Simeon were fifty-nine thousand three hundred.
For the sons of Gad, according to their genealogical records by their families, by their fathers' house with the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, everyone going forth with the militia host,
their mustered ones for the stock of Gad were forty-five thousand six hundred fifty.
For the sons of Judah, according to their genealogical records by their families, by their fathers' house with the number of names from twenty years old and upward, everyone going forth with the militia host,
their mustered ones for the stock of Judah were seventy-four thousand six hundred.
For the sons of Issachar, according to their genealogical records by their families, by their fathers' house with the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, everyone going forth with the militia host,
their mustered ones for the stock of Issachar were fifty-four thousand four hundred.
For the sons of Zebulun, according to their genealogical records by their families, by their fathers' house with the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, everyone going forth with the militia host,
their mustered ones for the stock of Zebulun were fifty-seven thousand four hundred.
For the sons of Joseph: for the sons of Ephraim, according to their genealogical records by their families, by their fathers' house with the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, everyone going forth with the militia host,
their mustered ones for the stock of Ephraim were forty thousand five hundred.
For the sons of Manasseh, according to their genealogical records by their families, by their fathers' house with the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, everyone going forth with the militia host,
their mustered ones for the stock of Manasseh were thirty-two thousand two hundred.
For the sons of Benjamin, according to their genealogical records by their families, by their fathers' house with the number of names from twenty years old and upward, everyone going forth with the militia host,
their mustered ones for the stock of Benjamin were thirty-five thousand four hundred.
For the sons of Dan, according to their genealogical records by their families, by their fathers' house with the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, everyone going forth with the militia host,
their mustered ones for the stock of Dan were sixty-two thousand seven hundred.
For the sons of Asher, according to their genealogical records by their families, by their fathers' house with the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, everyone going forth with the militia host,
their mustered ones for the stock of Asher were forty-one thousand five hundred.
For the sons of Naphtali, according to their genealogical records by their families, by their fathers' house with the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, everyone going forth with the militia host,
their mustered ones for the stock of Naphtali were fifty-three thousand four hundred.
These were the ones being mustered whom Moses, Aaron and the princes of Israel mustered, the twelve men, one each for his fathers' house.
All the ones being mustered of the sons of Israel came to be by their fathers' house, from twenty years old and upward, everyone going forth with the militia host in Israel;
so all the ones being mustered came to be six hundred three thousand five hundred fifty.
Yet the Levites, for the stock of their fathers, did not present themselves to be mustered in their midst;
for YHVH had spoken to Moses, saying:
Only the stock of Levi you shall not muster, and their sum you shall not obtain, in the midst of the sons of Israel.
As for you, give the Levites supervision over the tabernacle of the testimony, over all its furnishings and over all which pertains to it. They themselves shall carry the tabernacle and all its furnishings; they shall minister to it, and around the tabernacle shall they encamp.
When the tabernacle is to journey the Levites shall take it down; and when the tabernacle is to encamp the Levites shall set it up. But any alien who comes near shall be put to death.
The sons of Israel will encamp by their militia hosts, each man on his campsite and each under his standard.
Yet the Levites shall encamp around the tabernacle of the testimony so that no wrath may come on the congregation of the sons of Israel. The Levites will keep guard of the tabernacle of the testimony.
Thus the sons of Israel did according to all that YHVH had instructed Moses; so they did.
YHVH spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying:
Each man under his standard, under the ensigns for their fathers' house, so shall the sons of Israel encamp. From a distance around the tent of appointment shall they encamp.
Those encamping eastward, toward the sunrise, are under the standard of the camp of Judah, by their militia hosts. The prince for the sons of Judah is Nahshon son of Amminadab;
his militia host and their mustered ones are seventy-four thousand six hundred.
Those encamping next to him are the stock of Issachar. The prince for the sons of Issachar is Nathanael son of Zuar;
his militia host and its mustered ones are fifty-four thousand four hundred.
The stock of Zebulun: The prince for the sons of Zebulun is Eliab son of Helon;
his militia host and its mustered ones are fifty-seven thousand four hundred.
All the ones being mustered of the camp of Judah are a hundred eighty-six thousand four hundred, by their militia hosts. As the first shall they journey.
The standard of the camp of Reuben is southward, by their militia hosts. The prince for the sons of Reuben is Elizur son of Shedeur;
his militia host and its mustered ones are forty-six thousand five hundred.
Those encamping next to him are the stock of Simeon. The prince for the sons of Simeon is Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai;
his militia host and their mustered ones are fifty-nine thousand three hundred.
As for the stock of Gad: The prince for the sons of Gad is Eliasaph son of Reuel;
his militia host and their mustered ones are forty-five thousand six hundred fifty.
All the ones being mustered of the camp of Reuben are a hundred fifty-one thousand four hundred fifty, by their militia hosts. As second ones shall they journey.
Then the tent of appointment will journey with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the other camps. Just as they are encamping so shall they journey, each man on his own side under their standards.
The standard of the camp of Ephraim, by their militia hosts, is westward. The prince for the sons of Ephraim is Elishama son of Ammihud;
his militia host and their mustered ones are forty thousand five hundred.
Those encamping next to him are the stock of Manasseh. The prince for the sons of Manasseh is Gamaliel son of Pedahzur;
his militia host and their mustered ones are thirty-two thousand two hundred.
As for the stock of Benjamin: The prince for the sons of Benjamin is Abidan son of Gideoni;
his militia host and their mustered ones are thirty-five thousand four hundred.
All the ones being mustered of the camp of Ephraim are a hundred eight thousand one hundred, by their militia hosts. As third ones shall they journey.
The standard of the camp of Dan is northward, by their militia hosts. The prince of the sons of Dan is Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai;
his militia host and their mustered ones are sixty-two thousand seven hundred.
And those encamping next to him are the stock of Asher. The prince for the sons of Asher is Pagiel son of Ocran;
his militia host and their mustered ones are forty-one thousand five hundred.
As for the stock of Naphtali: The prince for the sons of Naphtali is Ahida son of Enan;
his militia host and their mustered ones are fifty-three thousand four hundred.
All the ones being mustered of the camp of Dan are a hundred fifty seven thousand six hundred. As the last shall they journey under their standards.
These are the ones being mustered of the sons of Israel by their father's house. All the ones being mustered of the camps by their militia hosts are six hundred three thousand five hundred fifty.
Yet the Levites did not present themselves to be mustered in the midst of the sons of Israel, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
Thus the sons of Israel did according to all which YHVH had instructed Moses. So they encamped under their standards, and so they journeyed, each by his families along with his fathers' house.
These are the genealogical records of Aaron and Moses, on the day YHVH spoke with Moses on Mount Sinai.
And these were the names of the sons of Aaron: the firstborn Nadab, then Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
These were the names of the sons of Aaron, the anointed priests, whose hands he filled to serve as priests.
Yet Nadab and Abihu died before YHVH when they brought near alien fire before YHVH in the wilderness of Sinai. They did not come to have sons, so Eleazar and Ithamar served as priests in the presence of Aaron their father.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Bring near the stock of Levi and stand them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister to him.
For they will keep charge for him and charge for the whole congregation before the tent of appointment to serve in the service of the tabernacle.
They will keep all the furnishings of the tent of appointment and the charge for the sons of Israel to serve in the service of the tabernacle.
To Aaron and to his sons will you give the Levites. They are the ones being given, yea given to Me from the sons of Israel.
And to Aaron and his sons shall you commit this that they observe their priesthood. But any alien who comes near shall be put to death.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
As for me, behold, I take the Levites from the midst of the sons of Israel instead of every firstborn male opening up the womb among the sons of Israel. So the Levites became Mine,
for every firstborn male is Mine. In the day I smote every firstborn male in the land of Egypt I sanctified for Myself every firstborn male in Israel from human unto beast. Mine shall they become: I am YHVH.
YHVH spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, saying:
Muster the sons of Levi by their fathers' house, by their families; every male from a month old and upward, you shall muster them.
So Moses mustered them at the bidding of YHVH, just as he was instructed.
And these were the sons of Levi by their names: Gershon, Kohath and Merari.
These were the names of the sons of Gershon by their families: Libni and Shimei;
and the sons of Kohath by their families: Amram and Izhar, Hebron and Uzziel;
and the sons of Merari by their families: Mahli and Mushi. These names were those of the Levite families by their fathers' house.
Belonging to Gershon were the Libnite family and the Shimeite family. These two were those of the Gershonite families.
Their mustered ones according to the number of every male from a month old and upward, their mustered ones were seven thousand five hundred.
The Gershonite families encamped behind the tabernacle westward.
And the prince of their fathers' house for the Gershonite was Eliasaph son of Lael.
The charge of the sons of Gershon at the tent of appointment was the tabernacle and the tent, its covering and the portiere of the opening of the tent of appointment,
the slung sheets of the court and the portiere of the portal of the court which was surrounding the tabernacle and the altar, also its cords for all its service.
Belonging to Kohath were the Amramite family, the Izharite family, the Hebronite family and the Uzzielite family. These were those of the Kohathite families.
According to the number of every male from a month old and upward, there were eight thousand six hundred keeping charge of the holy place.
The families of the sons of Kohath encamped at the flank of the tabernacle, southward.
And the prince of their fathers' house for the Kohathite families was Elizaphan son of Uzziel.
And their charge was the coffer and the table and the lampstand and the altars and the furnishings of the holy place with which they shall minister and the portiere and all its service.
And the prince of the Levite princes was Eleazar son of Aaron the priest, with the supervision of those keeping charge of the holy place.
Belonging to Merari were the Mahlite family and the Mushite family. These two were those of the Merari families.
Their mustered ones according to the number of every male from a month old and upward were six thousand two hundred.
And the prince of their fathers' house for the families of Merari was Zuriel son of Abihail. At the flank of the tabernacle they encamped, northward.
And the supervision, the charge of the sons of Merari, was the hollow tapers of the tabernacle and its bars, its columns and its sockets, all its furnishings and all its service,
also the columns of the court round about and their sockets, their pegs and their cords.
Those encamping before the tabernacle eastward, before the tent of appointment, toward the sunrise, were Moses and Aaron and his sons, the ones keeping charge of the sanctuary as the charge of the sons of Israel. But any alien who comes near shall be put to death.
All the ones being mustered of the Levites whom Moses and Aaron mustered at the bidding of YHVH by their families, every male from a month old and upward were twenty-two thousand.
YHVH said to Moses: Muster every firstborn male of the sons of Israel from a month old and upward and obtain the number of their names.
You will take the Levites for Me (I am YHVH) instead of every firstborn among the sons of Israel, and the beasts of the Levites instead of every firstborn among the beasts of the sons of Israel.
So Moses mustered, just as YHVH had instructed him, every firstborn among the sons of Israel.
And all the firstborn males by the number of the names, from a month old and upward, as they had been mustered, were twenty-two thousand two hundred and seventy-three.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Take the Levites instead of every firstborn among the sons of Israel and the beasts of the Levites instead of their beasts. So the Levites become Mine: I am YHVH.
And as the ransoms of the two hundred seventy-three, the superfluity, those over the number of the Levites, from the firstborn of the sons of Israel
you will take also five shekels, five shekels per skull. By the shekel of the holy place shall you take them, twentieth of a gerah to the shekel.
And you will give the silver to Aaron and to his sons, the ransoms of the superfluity among them.
So Moses took the silver of the ransoms from the superfluity, those over the ones ransomed by the Levites.
From the firstborn of the sons of Israel he took the silver, a thousand three hundred sixty-five shekels, by the shekel of the holy place.
And Moses gave the silver of the ransoms to Aaron and to his sons at the bidding of YHVH, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
YHVH spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying:
You are to obtain the sum of the sons of Kohath from the midst of the sons of Levi by their families, by their fathers' house,
from thirty years old and upward, unto fifty years old, all those coming to the Levitical host, to do the work in the tent of appointment.
This is the carrier service of the sons of Kohath in the tent of appointment: the holy of holies.
For Aaron will come in, and his sons, when the camp is to journey, and they will take down the portiere curtain and cover the coffer of the testimony with it.
They will put on it a cover of azure hide and spread over it a cloth wholly of blue from above and put its poles in place.
And over the table of the presence they shall spread a blue cloth, and they will put on it the dishes and the spoons, the waste pans and the libation chalices. Also the continual bread shall be on it.
Then they will spread over them a cloth of double-dipped crimson, and they will cover it with a cover of azure hide and put its poles in place.
They will take a blue cloth and cover the lampstand of the luminary, its lamps and its snuffers, its fire-pans and all its oil vessels with which they minister to it.
Then they will put it and all its furnishings into a cover of azure hide and put it on the slider bar.
Also on the golden altar shall they spread a blue cloth, and they will cover it with a cover of azure hide and put its poles in place.
They will take all the furnishings of the ministry with which they minister in the holy place and wrap them in a blue cloth and cover them with a cover of azure hide and put them on the slider bar.
Then they will degrease the copper altar, spread over it a purple cloth
and put on it all its furnishings with which they minister on it, the fire-pans, the forks and the shovels and the sprinkling bowls, all the furnishings of the altar; they will spread over it a cover of azure hide and put its poles in place. And they will take a purple cloth and cover the laver and its base and put them into a cover of azure hide and put them on the slider bar.
When Aaron and his sons have finished covering the holy things with all the furnishings of the holy things when the camp is to journey, then afterward the sons of Kohath shall come to carry it. Yet they shall not touch the holy things lest they die. These are the load of the sons of Kohath in the tent of appointment.
Under the supervision of Eleazar son of Aaron the priest is the oil for the luminary, the incense of spices, the regular approach present and the anointing oil; he has the supervision over the whole tabernacle and all that is in it, among the holy things and its furnishings.
YHVH spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying:
Do not let the tribe of the Kohathite families be cut off from the midst of the Levites.
Yet this do for them, and they will live and shall not die when they come close to the holy of holies: Aaron and his sons shall come and will appoint them, each man to his service and to his load.
Yet they shall not come in to see the sanctuary in dismantling, for they would die.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
You are to obtain the sum of the sons of Gershon, of them also by their fathers' house, by their families.
From thirty years old and upward unto fifty years old shall you muster them, everyone coming to enlist with the Levitical host to serve in the service in the tent of appointment.
This is the service of the Gershonite families, to serve and to carry loads:
They will carry the sheets of the tabernacle and the tent of appointment, its covering and the azure cover which is on it from above and the portiere of the opening of the tent of appointment,
also the slung sheets of the court and the portiere of the opening of the gate of the court which is surrounding the tabernacle and the altar, and their cords and all the furnishings for their service; in all which is to be done with regard to them, they will serve.
At the bidding of Aaron and his sons shall be all the service of the sons of the Gershonite, for all their load and for all their service. And you will commit to them as a charge all of their load.
This is the service of the families of the sons of the Gershonite in the tent of appointment. And their charge is in the hand of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.
As for the sons of Merari, by their families, by their fathers' house you shall muster them.
From thirty years old and upward unto fifty years old shall you muster them, everyone coming to the Levitical host to serve in the service of the tent of appointment.
This is the charge of their load for all their service in the tent of appointment: the hollow tapers of the tabernacle with its bars, its columns and its sockets,
the columns around the court with their sockets, their pegs and their cords with all their furnishings and with all their servicing. By names shall you check all the furnishings of the charge of their load.
This is the service of the families of the sons of Merari for all their service in the tent of appointment in the hand of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.
Moses and Aaron and the princes of the congregation mustered the sons of the Kohathite by their families and by their fathers' house,
from thirty years old and upward unto fifty years old, everyone coming to the Levitical host for service in the tent of appointment,
their mustered ones by their families were two thousand seven hundred fifty.
These were the ones being mustered of the Kohathite families, everyone serving in the tent of appointment whom Moses and Aaron mustered at the bidding of YHVH by means of Moses.
As for the ones being mustered of the sons of Gershon, by their families and by their fathers' house,
from thirty years old and upward unto fifty years old, everyone coming to the Levitical host for service in the tent of appointment,
their mustered ones by their families, by their fathers' house, were two thousand six hundred thirty.
These were the ones being mustered of the families of the sons of Gershon, everyone serving in the tent of appointment, whom Moses and Aaron mustered at the bidding of YHVH, by means of Moses.
As for the ones being mustered of the families of the sons of Merari, by their families, by their fathers' house,
from thirty years old and upward unto fifty years old, everyone coming to the Levitical host for service in the tent of appointment,
their mustered ones by their families were three thousand two hundred.
These were the ones being mustered of the families of the sons of Merari whom Moses and Aaron mustered at the bidding of YHVH by means of Moses.
All the ones being mustered whom Moses and Aaron and the princes of Israel mustered of the Levites by their families and by their fathers' house,
from thirty years old and upward unto fifty years old, everyone coming to serve on the servicing service and the carrying service in the tent of appointment,
their mustered ones were eight thousand five hundred eighty.
At the bidding of YHVH one mustered them, by means of Moses, each man for his service and for his load; thus they were being mustered by him just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Instruct the sons of Israel that they shall send away from the camp every leprous human and everyone having a discharge and everyone defiled by a deceased soul.
Both male and female shall you send them away outside the camp. You shall send them away so that they may not defile their camps in the midst of which I am tabernacling.
The sons of Israel did so and sent them outside the camp. Just as YHVH had spoken to Moses so did the sons of Israel.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, In case a man or a woman should commit any of the sins of humanity so as to offend with an offense against YHVH, and that soul realizes his guilt,
then they will confess their sin which they had committed, the sinner will make restoration for his guilt in its full value, and he shall add a fifth of it onto it and give it to him to whom he became guilty.
If there is for the man no redeemer so as to make restoration for the guilt to him, then the guilt restoration goes to YHVH for the priest, aside from the ram of the propitiatory shelter by which he shall make a propitiatory shelter over him.
Also every heave offering pertaining to all the holy gifts of the sons of Israel which they may bring near to the priest, his shall it become.
One's holy gifts shall become his; whatever one should give to the priest, his shall it become.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them: In case any man's wife swerves, and she offends against him, the offense being
that a man who lies with her has an emission of semen, and it is obscured from her husband's eyes, and she conceals that she defiled herself since there was no witness against her, and she was not grabbed with force;
and if a spirit of jealousy passes over him, so that he is jealous of his wife since she defiled herself, or if the spirit of jealousy passes over him so that he is jealous of his wife even though she has not defiled herself,
then the man will bring his wife to the priest and bring her approach present for her, the tenth of an ephah of barley meal. He shall not pour oil on it, neither shall he put frankincense on it, for it is an approach present of jealousies, a memorial approach present, a reminder of depravity.
Then the priest will bring her near and stand her before YHVH.
And the priest will take holy water in an earthenware vessel, and from the soil which comes to be on the floor of the tabernacle the priest shall take some and put it into the water.
The priest will stand the woman before YHVH, uncover the woman's head and put the memorial approach present on her palms. It is an approach present of jealousies. Yet in the hand of the priest shall come to be the waters of bitterness that bring the curse.
Then the priest will adjure her and say to the woman: If no man has lain with you, and if you have not swerved in uncleanness while under your husband's authority, be innocent from the waters of bitterness that bring this curse.
Yet you, in case you have swerved while under your husband's authority, and in case you have defiled yourself, while a man other than your husband gave his emission to you,
(thus the priest will adjure the woman with the oath of imprecation, and the priest will say to the woman:) YHVH shall set you as an imprecation and an oath in the midst of your people when YHVH makes your thigh fall away and your belly turgid.
So the waters that bring this curse will come into your bowels causing the belly to be turgid and the thigh to fall away. And the woman will say: Amen, amen.
The priest will write these imprecations on a scroll, and he will wipe them out with the waters of bitterness.
He will cause the woman to drink the waters of bitterness that bring the curse, and the waters that bring the curse will come into her as bitter ones.
Then the priest will take from the hand of the woman the approach present of jealousies and wave the approach present before YHVH and bring it near to the altar.
The priest will extract from the approach present a memorial of it and cause it to fume on the altar, and afterward he shall cause the woman to drink the waters.
When he causes her to drink the waters then it will come to be, if she has defiled herself and offended with an offense against her husband, that the waters that bring the curse will come into her as bitter ones, and her belly will be turgid, and her thigh will fall away, and the woman will come to be as an imprecation among her people.
Yet if the woman has not defiled herself and she is clean, then she is held innocent, and will engender seed.
This is the law of jealousies when a woman swerves while under her husband's authority, and she defiles herself,
or when a spirit of jealousy is passing over him and the husband is made jealous of his wife, then he will cause the woman to stand before YHVH. Thus the priest will apply to her all this law.
The husband is held innocent from depravity, and that woman shall bear her depravity.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them: In case a man or a woman should make an extraordinary vow, the Nazirite vow, to sequester himself to YHVH,
from wine and intoxicant shall he sequester himself. Vinegar of wine and vinegar of an intoxicant he shall not drink, and any other liquid of grapes he shall not drink, and grapes, sappy or dried, he shall not eat.
All the days of his sequestration from all which is made from the vine, the wine from pips as well as grape-skin he shall not eat.
All the days of his Nazirite vow no razor shall pass over his head; until the days are fulfilled in which he is sequestering himself to YHVH he shall come to be holy, letting the locks of the hair of his head grow great.
All the days of his sequestration to YHVH he shall not come near a dead soul.
Even for his father or for his mother, for his brother or for his sister, he shall not defile himself for them at their death, because the symbol of sequestration to his God is on his head.
All the days of his sequestration he is holy to YHVH.
In case someone dying should die near him in an instant, suddenly, so that he defiles his head of sequestration, then he will shave his head on the day of his cleansing. On the seventh day shall he shave it.
And on the eighth day he shall bring two turtledoves or two dove squabs to the priest, at the opening of the tent of appointment.
The priest will offer one for a sin offering and one for an ascent offering, and he will make a propitiatory shelter over him because of that which he had sinned concerning the dead soul. Then he will hallow his head on that day
and sequester himself to YHVH for the days of his sequestration and bring a year-old he-lamb for a guilt offering. Yet the former days shall fall out because his sequestration was unclean.
This is the law of the Nazirite on the day of fulfilling the days of his sequestration. One shall bring him to the opening of the tent of appointment.
He will bring near his approach present to YHVH, one flawless he-lamb, a year-old, for an ascent offering, and one flawless ewe-lamb, a year-old, for a sin offering, and one flawless ram for peace offerings,
also a tray of unleavened, perforated cakes of flour mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and their approach present and their libations.
Then the priest will bring them near before YHVH and offer his sin offering and his ascent offering.
He shall offer the ram as a sacrifice of peace offerings to YHVH along with the tray of unleavened cakes. And the priest will offer his approach present and his libation.
Then the Nazirite will shave his head of sequestration at the opening of the tent of appointment; he will take the hair of his head of sequestration and put it on the fire which is under the sacrifice of peace offerings.
The priest will take the cooked shank from the ram and one unleavened, perforated cake from the tray and one unleavened wafer, and he will put them on the palms of the Nazirite after he has shaved himself of his sequestration symbol.
The priest will wave them as a wave offering before YHVH. It is holy for the priest in addition to the chest of the wave offering and the leg of the heave offering. Thereafter the Nazirite may drink wine.
This is the law of the Nazirite who vows his approach present to YHVH at his sequestration, aside from what his hand can afford. Corresponding to his vow which he vows, so shall he do concerning the law of his sequestration.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to Aaron and to his sons, saying, Thus shall you bless the sons of Israel, saying to them,
May YHVH bless you and keep you;
may YHVH light up His face toward you and be gracious to you;
may YHVH lift His face to you and appoint peace for you.
Thus they will place My name over the sons of Israel and I Myself shall bless them.
It came to be on the day Moses finished setting up the tabernacle that he anointed it and hallowed it and all its furnishings, and the altar and all its furnishings. When he had anointed them and hallowed them,
then the princes of Israel (the heads of their fathers' house, they, princes of the twelve stocks, they who had been standing over the ones being mustered) made an offering
and brought their approach present before YHVH: six coach carts and twelve oxen, a cart for two of the princes and a bull for each one. They brought them near before the tabernacle.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Take them from them so that they will come to serve for the service of the tent of appointment, and give them to the Levites, to each man corresponding to his service.
So Moses took the carts and the oxen and gave them to the Levites.
Two of the carts and four of the oxen he gave to the sons of Gershon corresponding to their service,
and four of the carts and eight of the oxen he gave to the sons of Merari, corresponding to their service, by means of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.
Yet to the sons of Kohath he gave none, for the carrier service of the holy of holies was on them; on their shoulders they carried it.
The princes made an offering for the dedication of the altar on the day it was anointed. The princes brought near their approach present before the altar.
And YHVH said to Moses: One prince for one day, one prince for another day shall bring near their approach present for the dedication of the altar.
The one bringing near his approach present on the first day was Nahshon son of Amminadab, for the stock of Judah.
And his approach present was one silver dish, a hundred thirty shekels its weight, one silver sprinkling bowl of seventy shekels by the shekel of the holy place, both of them full of flour mingled with oil for an approach present,
one spoon of ten shekels of gold full of incense,
one young bull (a calf of the herd), one ram, one year-old he-lamb for an ascent offering,
one hairy one of the goats for a sin offering,
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five year-old he-lambs. This was the approach present of Nahshon son of Amminadab.
On the second day Nathanael son of Zuar, prince of Issachar made an offering.
He brought near his approach present, one silver dish, a hundred thirty shekels its weight, one silver sprinkling bowl of seventy shekels by the shekel of the holy place, both of them full of flour mingled with oil for an approach present,
one spoon of ten shekels of gold full of incense,
one young bull (a calf of the herd), one ram, one year-old he-lamb for an ascent offering,
one hairy one of the goats for a sin offering,
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five year-old he-lambs. This was the approach present of Nathanael son of Zuar.
On the third day it was the prince for the sons of Zebulun, Eliab son of Helon.
His approach present was one silver dish, a hundred thirty shekels its weight, one silver sprinkling bowl of seventy shekels by the shekel of the holy place, both of them full of flour mingled with oil for an approach present,
one spoon of ten shekels of gold full of incense,
one young bull (a calf of the herd), one ram, one year-old he-lamb for an ascent offering,
one hairy one of the goats for a sin offering,
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five year-old he-lambs. This was the approach present of Eliab son of Helon.
On the fourth day it was the prince for the sons of Reuben, Elizur son of Shedeur.
His approach present was one silver dish, a hundred thirty shekels its weight, one silver sprinkling bowl of seventy shekels by the shekel of the holy place, both of them full of flour mingled with oil for an approach present,
one spoon of ten shekels of gold full of incense,
one young bull (a calf of the herd), one ram, one year-old he-lamb for an ascent offering,
one hairy one of the goats for a sin offering,
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five year-old he-lambs. This was the approach present of Elizur son of Shedeur.
On the fifth day it was the prince for the sons of Simeon, Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai.
His approach present was one silver dish, a hundred thirty shekels its weight, one silver sprinkling bowl of seventy shekels by the shekel of the holy place, both of them full of flour mingled with oil for an approach present,
one spoon of ten shekels of gold full of incense,
one young bull (a calf of the herd), one ram, one year-old he-lamb for an ascent offering,
one hairy one of the goats for a sin offering,
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five year-old he-lambs. This was the approach present of Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai.
On the sixth day it was the prince for the sons of Gad, Eliasaph son of Reuel.
His approach present was one silver dish, a hundred thirty shekels its weight, one silver sprinkling bowl of seventy shekels by the shekel of the holy place, both of them full of flour mingled with oil for an approach present,
one spoon of ten shekels of gold full of incense,
one young bull (a calf of the herd), one ram, one year-old he-lamb for an ascent offering,
one hairy one of the goats for a sin offering,
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five year-old he-lambs. This was the approach present of Eliasaph son of Reuel.
On the seventh day it was the prince for the sons of Ephraim, Elishama son of Ammihud.
His approach present was one silver dish, a hundred thirty shekels its weight, one silver sprinkling bowl of seventy shekels by the shekel of the holy place, both of them full of flour mingled with oil for an approach present,
one spoon of ten shekels of gold full of incense,
one young bull (a calf of the herd), one ram, one year-old he-lamb for an ascent offering,
one hairy one of the goats for a sin offering,
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five year-old he-lambs. This was the approach present of Elishama son of Ammihud.
On the eighth day it was the prince for the sons of Manasseh, Gamaliel son of Pedahzur.
His approach present was one silver dish, a hundred thirty shekels its weight, one silver sprinkling bowl of seventy shekels by the shekel of the holy place, both of them full of flour mingled with oil for an approach present,
one spoon of ten shekels of gold full of incense,
one young bull (a calf of the herd), one ram, one year-old he-lamb for an ascent offering,
one hairy one of the goats for a sin offering,
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five year-old he-lambs. This was the approach present of Gamaliel son of Pedahzur.
On the ninth day it was the prince for the sons of Benjamin, Abidan son of Gideoni.
His approach present was one silver dish, a hundred thirty shekels its weight, one silver sprinkling bowl of seventy shekels by the shekel of the holy place, both of them full of flour mingled with oil for an approach present,
one spoon of ten shekels of gold full of incense,
one young bull (a calf of the herd), one ram, one year-old he-lamb for an ascent offering,
one hairy one of the goats for a sin offering
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five year-old he-lambs. This was the approach present of Abidan son of Gideoni.
On the tenth day it was the prince for the sons of Dan, Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai.
His approach present was one silver dish, a hundred thirty shekels its weight, one silver sprinkling bowl of seventy shekels by the shekel of the holy place, both of them full of flour mingled with oil for an approach present,
one spoon of ten shekels of gold full of incense,
one young bull (a calf of the herd), one ram, one year-old he-lamb for an ascent offering,
one hairy one of the goats for a sin offering,
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five year-old he-lambs. This was the approach present of Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai.
On the eleventh day it was the day for the prince for the sons of Asher, Pagiel son of Ocran.
His approach present was one silver dish, a hundred thirty shekels its weight, one silver sprinkling bowl of seventy shekels by the shekel of the holy place, both of them full of flour mingled with oil for an approach present,
one spoon of ten shekels of gold full of incense,
one young bull (a calf of the herd), one ram, one year-old he-lamb for an ascent offering,
one hairy one of the goats for a sin offering,
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five year-old he-lambs. This was the approach present of Pagiel son of Ocran.
On the twelfth day it was the day for the prince for the sons of Naphtali, Ahira son of Enan.
His approach present was one silver dish, a hundred thirty shekels its weight, one silver sprinkling bowl of seventy shekels by the shekel of the holy place, both of them full of flour mingled with oil for an approach present,
one spoon of ten shekels of gold full of incense,
one young bull (a calf of the herd), one ram, one year-old he-lamb for an ascent offering,
one hairy one of the goats for a sin offering,
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five year-old he-lambs. This was the approach present of Ahira son of Enan.
This was the dedication offering of the altar on the day it was anointed by the princes of Israel: twelve silver dishes, twelve silver sprinkling bowls, twelve gold spoons;
a single silver dish weighed a hundred thirty shekels, a single sprinkling bowl weighed seventy shekels. All the silver of the vessels was two thousand four hundred shekels by the shekel of the holy place.
The twelve gold spoons, full of incense, weighed ten shekels each, ten a spoon, by the shekel of the holy place. All the gold of the spoons was a hundred twenty shekels.
All the oxen for the ascent offering were twelve young bulls, twelve rams, twelve year-old he-lambs with their approach present, and twelve hairy ones of the goats for a sin offering.
And all the oxen of the sacrifice of peace offerings were twenty-four young bulls, sixty rams, sixty he-goats, sixty year-old he-lambs. This was the dedication offering of the altar after it was anointed.
Whenever Moses came into the tent of appointment to speak with Him then he would hear the voice of YHVH speaking to him above the propitiatory shelter which was on the coffer of the testimony; it was from between the two cherubim that He spoke to him.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to Aaron and say to him, When you set up the lamps, toward the face of the lampstand the seven lamps shall give light.
Aaron did so; toward the face of the lampstand, he set up its lamps just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
And this was the handiwork of the lampstand: a stiff shell of gold from its stem unto its buds it was a stiff shell. According to the appearance which YHVH had shown Moses, so he made the lampstand.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Take the Levites from the midst of the sons of Israel and cleanse them.
Thus shall you do to them to cleanse them: spatter water of purification from sin over them, let them pass a razor over all their flesh, let them rinse their garments and so cleanse themselves.
They will take a young bull (a calf of the herd) and its approach present of flour mingled with oil; then you shall take a second young bull (a calf of the herd) for a sin offering.
You will bring near the Levites before the tent of appointment and assemble the whole congregation of the sons of Israel.
When you bring near the Levites before YHVH, then the sons of Israel will support their hands on the Levites,
and Aaron will wave the Levites as a wave offering before YHVH from the sons of Israel, so that they will come to serve in the service of YHVH.
And the Levites, they shall support their hands on the heads of the young bulls. Then offer the one as a sin offering and the other as an ascent offering to YHVH to make a propitiatory shelter over the Levites.
Have the Levites stand before Aaron and before his sons, and wave them as a wave offering before YHVH.
Thus you will separate the Levites from the midst of the sons of Israel, so that the Levites become Mine.
And afterward the Levites shall come to serve in the service of the tent of appointment when you have cleansed them and waved them as a wave offering.
For they are the ones being given, yea given to Me from the midst of the sons of Israel; instead of everyone opening up the womb, every firstborn of the sons of Israel, I have taken them for Myself;
for Mine is every firstborn among the sons of Israel among human and among beast. On the day I smote every firstborn in the land of Egypt I sanctified them for Myself.
So I shall take the Levites instead of every firstborn among the sons of Israel,
and give the Levites from the midst of the sons of Israel as a gift to Aaron and to his sons to serve in the service on behalf of the sons of Israel in the tent of appointment and to make a separating shelter for the sons of Israel so that no stroke may come among the sons of Israel when the sons of Israel come close to the holy place.
Moses, Aaron and the whole congregation of the sons of Israel dealt with the Levites according to all that YHVH had instructed Moses as to the Levites. So the sons of Israel dealt with them.
The Levites purified themselves from sin and rinsed their garments, and Aaron waved them as a wave offering before YHVH; then Aaron made a propitiatory shelter over them to cleanse them.
And afterward the Levites came to serve their service in the tent of appointment before Aaron and before his sons. Just as YHVH had instructed Moses concerning the Levites, so they dealt with them.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
This is what applies to the Levites. From twenty-five years old and upward may one come to enlist with the Levitical host in the service of the tent of appointment.
And from fifty years old shall one retire from the active service in the Levitical host and shall serve no longer;
yet he may minister to his brothers in the tent of appointment, so as to keep guard, though in active service he shall not serve. Thus shall you deal with the Levites in regard to their charges.
YHVH spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai in the second year of their coming forth from the land of Egypt, in the first month, saying:
The sons of Israel shall observe the passover at its appointed time.
On the fourteenth day of this month, between the evening hours, you shall observe it at its appointed time according to all its statutes, and according to all its customs shall you prepare it.
Then Moses spoke to the sons of Israel to observe the passover.
So they observed the passover in the first month on the fourteenth day of the month, between the evening hours, in the wilderness of Sinai. According to all that YHVH had instructed Moses, so did the sons of Israel.
And it came to be that some men who became unclean by touching a deceased soul of a human were not able to prepare the passover on that day. Then they came near before Moses and before Aaron on that day.
Those men said to him: We are unclean by touching a deceased soul of a human. Why should we be disadvantaged by failing to offer the approach present of YHVH at its appointed time in the midst of the sons of Israel?
So Moses said to them: Stand by and let me hear what instruction YHVH may give for you.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, In case any man of you or of your generations becomes unclean by a deceased soul or is on the road afar, he will also prepare a passover to YHVH.
In the second month on the fourteenth day, between the evening hours shall they observe it. Over unleavened cakes and bitter herbs shall they eat it.
None of it shall they let remain until the morning, and a bone of it they shall not break. According to every statute of the passover shall they observe it.
Yet the man, he who is clean and is not on the road and forbears to observe the passover, that soul will be cut off from its kinsmen because he has not brought near the approach present of YHVH at its appointed time, that man shall bear his sin.
And in case a sojourner sojourns with you and will observe the passover to YHVH according to the statute of the passover and according to its custom, so shall he do. One statute shall come to be for you, both for the sojourner and for the native of the land.
On the day the tabernacle was set up the cloud covered the tabernacle, the tent of the testimony. And in the evening it was over the tabernacle as the appearance of fire until the morning.
So it was continually; the cloud covered it by day and the appearance of fire by night.
At the bidding of the cloud, taken up off the tent, the sons of Israel journeyed afterward. And in the place where the cloud tabernacled there the sons of Israel encamped.
At the bidding of YHVH the sons of Israel journeyed, and at the bidding of YHVH they encamped. All the days that the cloud tabernacled over the tabernacle they encamped.
And when the cloud prolonged over the tabernacle many days then the sons of Israel kept the charge of YHVH and did not journey on.
Sometimes the cloud was over the tabernacle for a number of days. At the bidding of YHVH they encamped, and at the bidding of YHVH they journeyed.
Sometimes the cloud came to be only from evening until morning; when the cloud was taken up in the morning, then they journeyed. Whether by day or night, whenever the cloud was taken up then they journeyed.
Whether it was two days or a month or many days when the cloud prolonged over the tabernacle to tabernacle over it, the sons of Israel encamped and did not journey. Yet when it was taken up they journeyed.
At the bidding of YHVH they encamped, and at the bidding of YHVH they journeyed. The charge of YHVH they kept at the bidding of YHVH by means of Moses.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Make for yourself two bugles of silver. Out of a stiff shell shall you make them. And they will become yours for the calling of the congregation and for the journeying of the camps.
When they blow long on both of them, then the whole congregation will congregate with you at the opening of the tent of appointment.
Yet should they blow long on just one, then the princes, heads of the thousands of Israel, will congregate with you.
When you blow a short blast then the camps encamping eastward will journey.
When you blow the second blast then the camps encamping southward will journey. When you blow the third blast then the camps encamping westward will journey. When you blow the fourth blast then the camps encamping northward will journey. Short blasts shall they blow for their decampings;
yet when the assembly is to assemble you shall blow long and not sound short blasts.
The sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow the bugles. And they will be to you as an eonian statute throughout your generations.
In case you enter a war in your land with the foe who is distressing you then you will blast on the bugles, and you will be remembered before YHVH your God, and you will be saved from your enemies.
And in the day of your rejoicing, in your appointments and at the beginnings of your months you will blow on bugles over your ascent offerings and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings; and they will be to you for a memorial before your God. I, YHVH, am your God.
It came to be in the second year, in the second month on the twentieth of the month that the cloud was taken up off the tabernacle of the testimony.
So the sons of Israel decamped for their journeys from the wilderness of Sinai, until the cloud tabernacled in the wilderness of Paran.
Thus they decamped for the first time at the bidding of YHVH by means of Moses.
The standard of the camp of the sons of Judah decamped first by their militia hosts; and over his host was Nahshon son of Amminadab.
Over the host of the stock of the sons of Issachar was Nathanael son of Zuar.
And over the host of the stock of the sons of Zebulun was Eliab son of Helon.
Then the tabernacle was taken down, and the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari decamped, the carriers of the tabernacle.
Next the standard of the camp of Reuben decamped by their militia hosts; and over his host was Elizur son of Shedeur.
Over the host of the stock of the sons of Simeon was Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai.
And over the host of the stock of the sons of Gad was Eliasaph son of Reuel.
Then the Kohathites decamped, the carriers of the holy things. (The others would set up the tabernacle previous to their coming.)
The standard of the camp of the sons of Ephraim decamped by their militia hosts; and over his host was Elishama son of Ammihud.
Over the host of the stock of the sons of Manasseh was Gamaliel son of Pedahzur.
And over the host of the stock of the sons of Benjamin was Abidan son of Gideoni.
Then the standard of the camp of the sons of Dan decamped as rear guard for all the camps by their militia hosts; and over his host was Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai.
Over the host of the stock of the sons of Asher was Pagiel son of Ocran.
And over the host of the stock of the sons of Naphtali was Ahira son of Enan.
This was the order for the journey of the sons of Israel by their militia hosts when they journeyed on.
Moses said to Hobab son of Reuel the Midianite, father-in-law of Moses: We are journeying to the place of which YHVH said: It shall I give to you. Go with us and we will do good to you, for YHVH has pronounced good things for Israel.
Yet he said to him: I shall not go, but rather to my land and to my kindred shall I go.
Then he said: Do not, I pray, forsake us, because you know where we are to encamp in the wilderness you will be as eyes for us.
And it will come to be in case you go with us, when that good comes by which YHVH shall do good to us, we also will do good to you.
They journeyed from the mount of YHVH a way of three days while the coffer of the covenant of YHVH was journeying before them a way of three days to explore a resting place for them.
And the cloud of YHVH was over them by day on their journey from the camp.
It came to be whenever the coffer journeyed Moses said: Arise, YHVH, that Your enemies may scatter and those hating You may flee from Your presence.
And whenever it stopped he said: Dwell, YHVH, with the myriads of Israel's thousands.
The people became like complainers, evil in the ears of YHVH. YHVH hearkened and His anger grew hot, and the fire of YHVH consumed some among them and devoured the outmost part of the camp.
Then the people cried to Moses, so Moses prayed to YHVH, and the fire was drowned.
He called the name of that place Taberah, for the fire of YHVH had consumed some among them.
The rabble which was among them lusted after yearning; and again the sons of Israel lamented also and said: Who shall give us flesh to eat?
We remember the fish which we ate in Egypt gratuitously, the cucumbers and the melons, the leeks, the onions and the garlic!
Yet now our soul's desire is dry; there is nothing at all barring the manna before our eyes.
Now the manna, it was like coriander seed and its sparkle was like the sparkle of a pearl.
The people went to and fro, and picked it up, ground it between millstones or crushed it in a crusher, cooked it in a kettle and made ember cakes from it. Its taste was like the taste of cakes fresh with oil.
At the descent of the night-mist on the camp at night the manna descended on it.
Moses heard the people lamenting by its families, each man at the opening of his tent. And the anger of YHVH grew exceedingly hot, and in the eyes of Moses it was evil.
Moses said to YHVH: Why have You dealt evil to Your servant? And why have I not found grace in Your eyes that You placed the load of all this people on me?
Was I myself pregnant with all this people, or did I generate it, that You should say to me: Carry it in your bosom just as a foster-father carries a suckling child, to the ground about which You had sworn to their fathers?
From where would I find flesh to give to all this people? For they are lamenting to me, saying: Do give us flesh and let us eat.
I am not able, by myself alone, to bear all this people, for it is too heavy for me.
So if thus You are doing to me, kill me, I pray, yea kill me. If I have found grace in Your eyes then do not let me see Your evil.
YHVH said to Moses: Do gather to me seventy men from the elders of Israel of whom you know that they are elders of the people and their superintendents, and take them to the tent of appointment that they station themselves there with you.
I will descend and speak with you there; and I will divert some of the spirit which is on you and place it on them. They will bear the load of the people with you so that you are not bearing it by yourself alone.
And to the people you shall say: Sanctify yourselves for the morrow, when you will eat flesh, for you lamented in the ears of YHVH, saying: Who shall give us flesh to eat? For it was well with us in Egypt. Now YHVH will give you flesh, and you will eat.
Not just one day shall you eat, nor two days nor five days nor ten days nor twenty days.
Unto a month of days shall you eat until it comes forth from your nostrils and becomes odious to you because you rejected YHVH Who is among you and lamented before Him, saying: Why is this that we came forth from Egypt?
Moses said: Six hundred thousand men on foot are the people among whom I am, yet You say: Flesh shall I give to them, and they will eat it for a month of days!
Shall the flock and the herd be slain for them to provide for them, or all the fish of the sea be gathered for them to provide for them?
And YHVH said to Moses: The hand of YHVH, is it short? Now shall you see whether My word shall happen to you or not.
Moses went forth and spoke to the people the words of YHVH. And he gathered seventy men from the elders of the people and stood them around the tent.
YHVH descended in a cloud and spoke to him. He caused some of the spirit which was on him to divert, and He put it on the seventy men, the elders. And it came to be as the spirit rested on them that they prophesied, yet they did not do so again.
Yet two men remained in the camp; the name of the one was Eldad and the name of the second Medad. The spirit also rested on them. Now they had been among those listed but had not gone forth toward the tent; yet they prophesied in the camp.
Now a youth ran and told Moses and said: Eldad and Medad are prophesying in the camp!
Joshua son of Nun, minister of Moses from his prime, answered and said: My lord Moses, forbid them!
Yet Moses said to him: Are you zealous for my sake? O that all the people of YHVH were prophets! For YHVH put His spirit on them.
Then Moses was gathered to the camp, he and the elders of Israel.
A wind journeyed from YHVH and sheered quail from the sea and let go of them over the camp about a day's way thus and a day's way thus around the camp, and they fell about two cubits deep over the surface of the earth.
The people rose all that day, all the night and all the morrow and gathered the quail. The least anyone gathered was ten homers. And they spread out the quail for themselves as a spreading round about the camp.
The flesh was still between their teeth, ere it was cut off, when the anger of YHVH grew hot against the people; and YHVH smote among the people with a very great smiting.
One called the name of that place Kibroth Hattaavah, for there they entombed the people, the lusters.
From Kibroth Hattaavah the people journeyed to Hazeroth. When they came to be in Hazeroth
then Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses concerning the case of the Cushite woman whom he took (for he had taken a Cushite woman).
They said: Is it but only through Moses that YHVH speaks? Does He not also speak through us? And YHVH heard.
Now the man Moses was exceedingly humble, more than any human who was on the surface of the ground.
YHVH said suddenly to Moses, to Aaron and to Miriam: Come forth, you three, to the tent of appointment. And the three of them went forth.
YHVH descended in the column of cloud and stood at the opening of the tent and called Aaron and Miriam. And the two of them went forth.
He said: Oh hear My words. If there were a prophet among you, I, YHVH, in an appearance shall make Myself known to him; in a dream shall I speak to him.
Not so with My servant Moses. In My whole house he is faithful.
Mouth to mouth am I speaking with him, and manifestly, not in enigmas, so that he looks at a representation of YHVH. So for what reason did you not fear to speak against My servant, against Moses?
The anger of YHVH grew hot against them, and He went away.
When the cloud withdrew from above the tent, behold, Miriam was leprous as snow. Aaron turned around to Miriam, and behold, she was leprous.
Aaron said to Moses, O! my lord, do not, I pray, set against us the sin in which we were foolish and with which we have sinned.
Oh do not let her be as the dead child of which, when it comes forth from the womb of its mother, half its flesh is devoured.
Then Moses cried to YHVH, saying: El, I pray heal her, I pray!
YHVH said to Moses: Had her father spit, yea spit in her face, would she not be put to shame seven days? She shall be locked out seven days outside the camp, and thereafter shall she be gathered in.
So Miriam was locked out outside the camp seven days. Yet the people did not journey until Miriam was gathered in.
Thereafter the people journeyed from Hazeroth and encamped in the wilderness of Paran.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Send some men ahead of you that they may explore the land of Canaan which I am giving to the sons of Israel. One man, one each for the stock of his fathers, shall you send and everyone a prince among them.
So Moses sent them from the wilderness of Paran at the bidding of YHVH; all of them men who were heads of the sons of Israel.
These were their names: for the stock of Reuben, Shammua son of Zaccur;
for the stock of Simeon, Shaphat son of Hori;
for the stock of Judah, Caleb son of Jephunneh;
for the stock of Issachar, Igal son of Joseph;
for the stock of Ephraim, Hosea son of Nun;
for the stock of Benjamin, Palti son of Raphu;
for the stock of Zebulun, Gaddiel son of Sodi;
for the stock of Joseph, for the stock of Manasseh, Gaddi son of Susi;
for the stock of Dan, Ammiel son of Gemalli;
for the stock of Asher, Sethur son of Michael;
for the stock of Naphtali, Nahbi son of Vophsi;
for the stock of Gad, Geuel son of Machi.
These were the names of the men whom Moses sent to explore the land. And Moses called Hosea son of Nun, Joshua.
Moses sent them to explore the land of Canaan and said to them: Go up this way into the Negev; then you will go up the hill-country
and see the land, what it is, and the people dwelling in it, whether they are courageous or slack, whether they are few or many.
And what about the land in which they are dwelling, whether it is good or bad. And what about the cities in which they are dwelling, whether in encampments or in fortresses.
And what about the land, whether it is fertile or lean, whether there are trees in it or not. Encourage yourselves and take some of the fruit of the land. (Now those days were the days of the firstfruits of grapes.)
So they went up and explored the land from the wilderness of Zin as far as Rehob toward Lebo-hamath.
When they went up through the Negev they came unto Hebron, where there Ahiman, Sheshai and Talmai, the children of Anak were. (Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan of Egypt.)
When they came back to the watercourse of Eshcol they cut from there a pruned slip with one cluster of grapes and carried it on a slider bar by two, also some of the pomegranates and the figs.
That place one called the watercourse of Eshcol on account of the cluster which the sons of Israel cut from there.
So they returned from exploring the land at the end of forty days.
Then they went and came to Moses, Aaron and to the whole congregation of the sons of Israel at the wilderness of Paran, toward Kadesh. They brought back word to them and to the whole congregation and showed them the fruit of the land.
They related to him and said: We came to the land to which you sent us, and indeed it is gushing with milk and honey, and this is its fruit.
Only that the people dwelling in the land are strong and the cities are defended and exceedingly great. Moreover, the children of Anak we saw there.
Amalek is dwelling in the land of the Negev, the Hittite, the Hivite, the Jebusite and the Amorite are dwelling in the hill-country, and the Canaanite are dwelling by the sea and by the side of the Jordan.
Then Caleb quelled the muttering of the people against Moses and said: We should go up, yea up and tenant it, for we are able to prevail against it.
Yet the men who went up with him said: We are not able to go up against the people, for they are more courageous than we.
Thus they brought forth among the sons of Israel disparaging muttering about the land which they had explored, saying: The land through which we passed to explore it, it is a land that is devouring its dwellers; it and all the people whom we saw in its midst were men of great measure.
There we saw the distinguished (the sons of Anak are part of the distinguished ones). And we became, in our own eyes, like grasshoppers; so we became in their eyes.
The whole congregation lifted up and gave forth their voice, and the people lamented through that night.
All the sons of Israel grumbled against Moses and against Aaron. The whole congregation said to them: O that we had died in the land of Egypt or in this wilderness! O that we had died!
Why is YHVH bringing us to this land to fall by the sword? Our wives and our little ones shall be taken as plunder. Is it not better for us to return to Egypt?
And they said each to his brother: Let us appoint a head, and let us return to Egypt.
Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before the whole assembly of the congregation of the sons of Israel.
Joshua son of Nun and Caleb son of Jephunneh, two of the explorers of the land, tore their garments
and said to the whole congregation of the sons of Israel, saying: The land through which we passed to explore it is a very, very good land.
If YHVH delights in us then He will bring us into this land, and He will give it to us. It is a land which is gushing with milk and honey.
Only against YHVH do not revolt, and you, do not fear the people of the land, for they are our bread. Their protecting shadow has withdrawn from over them, and YHVH is with us. Do not fear them.
Yet the whole congregation said to pelt them with stones. Then the glory of YHVH appeared in a cloud on the tent of appointment to all the sons of Israel.
YHVH said to Moses: How long shall this people spurn Me? And how long shall they not believe in Me despite all the signs which I have done among them?
I shall smite them with the plague and evict them, and I shall make you into a greater and more substantial nation than they.
Yet Moses said to YHVH: The Egyptians have heard that You brought up this people by Your vigor, from among them;
and they have spoken to the dwellers of this land; they have heard that You, YHVH, are among this people, that You are being seen eye to eye, YHVH, and Your cloud is standing over them, and in a column of cloud You are going before them by day and in a column of fire by night.
If You put this people to death as one man, then the nations who heard the report of You will say, saying:
Because YHVH was unable to bring this people to the land about which He had sworn to them, He slew them in the wilderness.
So now let, I pray, the vigor of YHVH be great just as You have spoken, saying:
YHVH, slow to anger and with much kindness and truth, bearing with depravity and transgression and sin, yet He is not immediately making innocent in order to make innocent, but is visiting the depravity of the fathers on the sons, on the third and on the fourth generation.
Pardon, I pray, the depravity of this people according to the greatness of Your kindness just as You bore with this people from Egypt and hitherto.
YHVH said: I have pardoned them according to your word.
Howbeit, as I am the living One, and as all the earth shall be filled with the glory of YHVH,
all the men who were seeing My glory and My signs which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, who probed Me these ten times and they did not hearken to My voice,
they assuredly shall not see the land about which I had sworn to their fathers! All who are spurning Me shall not see it.
Yet My servant Caleb, inasmuch as there is another spirit with him and he is following fully after Me, I will bring him to the land where he will enter, and his seed shall prepare it for tenancy.
Since the Amalekite and the Canaanite are dwelling in the vale, turn around tomorrow and journey; get yourself on to the wilderness, the Sea of Weeds road.
YHVH spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying:
How long shall I bear with this evil congregation, they who are grumbling against Me? I have heard the grumblings of the sons of Israel which they are grumbling against Me.
Say to them: As I am the living One (this is the averring of YHVH), just as you have spoken into My ears so shall I assuredly do to you.
In this wilderness your corpses shall fall: all your mustered ones, all of your number, from twenty years old and upward, you who have murmured against Me,
you yourselves shall assuredly not come into the land in which I lifted My hand to tabernacle you, none save Caleb son of Jephunneh and Joshua son of Nun.
As for your little ones of whom you have said: They shall be taken as plunder, I will also bring them in, and they will know the land which you have rejected.
As for you, your corpses shall fall in this wilderness,
and your sons shall be shepherds in the wilderness for forty years, and they will bear your prostitutions until your corpses are spent in the wilderness.
By the number of the days in which you explored the land, forty days, a day for a year, a day for a year, shall you bear your depravities: forty years; thus you will realize My repudiation.
I, YHVH, I have spoken. This assuredly shall I do to this whole evil congregation, those who are set against Me. In this wilderness shall they be spent, and there shall they die.
The men whom Moses had sent to explore the land, who had returned and caused the whole congregation to grumble against him by bringing forth a disparaging muttering about the land,
those men who were bringing forth evil mutterings of the land died by a stroke before YHVH.
As for Joshua son of Nun and Caleb son of Jephunneh, they remained alive of those men going to explore the land.
Moses spoke these words to all the sons of Israel, and the people mourned exceedingly.
They rose early in the morning and went up to the summit of the hill-country, saying: Behold us, now we will go up to the place of which YHVH spoke, for we have sinned.
Moses said: Why is this? You are trespassing the bidding of YHVH, so this shall not prosper.
Do not go up since YHVH is not among you so that you not be stricken before your enemies.
For the Amalekite and the Canaanite are there before you, and you will fall by the sword. Because you have turned back from following YHVH, YHVH shall not be with you.
Yet they presumed to go up to the summit of the hill-country though the coffer of the covenant of YHVH, and Moses, were not removed from within the camp.
The Amalekite and the Canaanite, dwelling in that hill-country, descended, smote them and pounded them as far as Hormah.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them, When you come to the land of your dwellings which I am giving to you
and you make a fire offering to YHVH, an ascent offering or a sacrifice for an extraordinary vow or in a voluntary offering or in your appointments to make a fragrant odor to YHVH from the herd or from the flock,
then the one approaching will bring near as his offering to YHVH an approach present, a tenth of an ephah of flour mingled with a fourth of a hin of oil;
as for wine for a libation you shall offer on the ascent offering or for a sacrifice a fourth of a hin with the one lamb.
Or for the ram you shall offer an approach present, two tenths of an ephah of flour mingled with a third of a hin of oil;
as for wine for a libation you shall bring near a third of a hin, a fragrant odor to YHVH.
In case you offer a bull calf of the herd as an ascent offering or a sacrifice for an extraordinary vow or peace offerings to YHVH,
then one will bring near with the bull calf of the herd an approach present, three tenths of an ephah of flour mingled with half a hin of oil;
as for wine you shall bring near for a libation, half a hin, as a fire offering of fragrant odor to YHVH.
Thus shall it be done for each bull or for each ram or for a flockling among the lambs or among the goats.
According to the number which you offer thus shall you do for each in their number.
Every native shall do these things thus to bring near a fire offering of fragrant odor to YHVH.
In case a sojourner is sojourning with you or whoever is in your midst throughout your generations, and he offers a fire offering of fragrant odor to YHVH, just as you are doing so shall he do.
As for the assembly, there shall be one statute for you and for the sojourner sojourning with you. It shall be an eonian statute throughout your generations. Like you so shall the sojourner be before YHVH.
One law and one custom shall come to be for you and for the sojourner sojourning with you.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them: When you come into the land where I am bringing you,
then will it come to be when you eat of the bread of the land you shall raise up a heave offering to YHVH.
Of the first batch of your coarse meal a perforated cake shall you raise up as a heave offering; as the heave offering of the threshing site, so shall you raise it up.
Of the first of your coarse meal shall you give to YHVH a heave offering throughout your generations.
In case you err and do not observe all these instructions which YHVH has pronounced to Moses,
all that YHVH has instructed you by means of Moses from the day on which YHVH instructed and beyond throughout your generations,
then it will come to be, if away from the eyes of the congregation anything is done through inadvertence, that the whole congregation will offer one young bull, a calf of the herd, as an ascent offering for a fragrant odor to YHVH, with its approach present and its libation as is the custom and one hairy one of the goats as a sin offering.
The priest will make a propitiatory shelter over the whole congregation of the sons of Israel, and it will be pardoned them, for it was an inadvertence. They will bring their approach present, a fire offering to YHVH, and their sin offering before YHVH over their inadvertence.
Then it will be pardoned to the whole congregation of the sons of Israel, and to the sojourner sojourning in their midst, for all the people had acted through inadvertence.
If one soul sins through inadvertence then he will bring near a year-old she-goat for a sin offering.
Over the erring soul when he sins through inadvertence the priest will make a propitiatory shelter before YHVH, to make a propitiatory shelter over him, and it will be pardoned him.
For the native among the sons of Israel and for the sojourner sojourning in their midst, one law shall apply for you, to anyone doing it through inadvertence.
Yet the soul who is doing anything with a high hand, from the native and from the sojourner, he is taunting YHVH; that soul will be cut off from among his people,
since the word of YHVH he despised and His instruction he annulled. That soul shall be cut off, yea cut off; his depravity is on him.
While the sons of Israel were in the wilderness they found a man gathering together sticks on the sabbath day.
Those finding him gathering the sticks together brought him near to Moses and to Aaron and to the whole congregation.
They left him under guard, for it had not been expounded what should be done to him.
YHVH said to Moses: The man shall be put to death, yea death. The whole congregation shall pelt him with stones outside the camp.
So the whole congregation brought him forth to outside the camp and pelted him with stones, so that he died just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them that they make for themselves tassels on the hems of their garments throughout their generations and put blue twine on the tassels of the hem.
You will come to have a tassel so that you will see it, remember all the instructions of YHVH and observe them and not explore after your heart and after your eyes after which you are prostituting;
so that you may remember and observe all My instructions and become holy to your God.
I, YHVH, am your God Who brought you forth from the land of Egypt to be your God. I, YHVH, am your God.
Korah son of Izhar, son of Kohath, son of Levi, arose along with Dathan and Abiram, sons of Eliab, and On son of Peleth (sons of Reuben);
they arose before Moses with men from the sons of Israel, two hundred fifty princes of the congregation, those called to appointment, men of renown.
They assembled against Moses and against Aaron and said to them: Enough of you! For the whole congregation, all of them are holy, and in their midst is YHVH; so for what reason are you lifting yourselves up over the assembly of YHVH?
When Moses heard this, he fell on his face.
Then he spoke to Korah and to his whole congregation, saying: In the morning YHVH shall make known who is His and who is holy, and He will bring him near to Him; whomever He may choose for Himself He shall bring near to Him.
This do: take fire-pans for yourselves, Korah and his whole congregation;
put fire in them and place incense on them before YHVH tomorrow. And it will come to be: the man whom YHVH shall choose, he is the holy one. Enough of you, sons of Levi!
Then Moses said to Korah: Hear, I pray, sons of Levi!
Is it too little a thing for you that God of Israel has separated you from the congregation of Israel to bring you near to Him to serve in the service of the tabernacle of YHVH and to stand before the congregation to minister to them?
He brought you near and all your brothers, the sons of Levi, with you. Yet now you seek even the priesthood!
Wherefore you and all your congregation are set against YHVH. As for Aaron, what is he that you are grumbling against him?
Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, sons of Eliab. Yet they said: We shall not come up.
Is it a little thing that you brought us up from a land gushing with milk and honey to put us to death in the wilderness, and that you are making yourself a chief, yea a chief over us?
Indeed, into a land gushing with milk and honey you did not bring us that you might give to us an allotment of field and vineyard. Are you picking out the eyes of these men? We shall not come up!
Moses' anger grew exceedingly hot, and he said to YHVH: Do not countenance their approach present. Not one donkey have I lifted from them, nor have I done evil to any one of them.
Moses said to Korah: You and your whole congregation, come before YHVH, you and they and Aaron tomorrow.
Take each man his fire-pan, put incense on them and bring each man his fire-pan near before YHVH, two hundred fifty fire-pans, and you and Aaron, each man his fire-pan.
So they took each man his fire-pan, put fire on them, placed incense on them, and they stood at the opening of the tent of appointment, also Moses and Aaron.
Korah had assembled the whole congregation against them at the opening of the tent of appointment. Then the glory of YHVH appeared to the whole congregation,
and YHVH spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying:
Separate yourselves from the midst of this congregation so that I may finish them in a moment.
Then they fell on their faces and said: El, God of the spirits for all flesh, as for the one man, he is sinning; but shall You be wrathful over the whole congregation?
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the congregation, saying: Move away from around the tabernacles of Korah, Dathan and Abiram.
So Moses rose and went to Dathan and Abiram, and the elders of Israel went after him.
He spoke to the congregation, saying: Withdraw, I pray, from the tents of these wicked men! Do not touch anything which belongs to them lest you be swept up in all their sins.
They moved away from the tabernacles of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, away from around them. As for Dathan and Abiram, they went forth, standing up at the opening of their tents with their wives, their sons and their little ones.
Moses said: By this shall you know that YHVH has sent me to perform all these deeds, that they are not from my own heart.
Should these die the common death of all humanity, and should the visitation of all humanity be visited on them, then YHVH has not sent me.
Yet should YHVH create an unprecedented creation so that the ground opens wide its mouth, swallows them up with all that belongs to them, and they descend alive to the unseen, then you will know that these mortals have spurned YHVH.
It came to be as he finished speaking all these words that the ground which was under them was rent,
and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them up with their households and all the humans who were with Korah and all the goods.
So they descended, they and all who belonged to them, alive to the unseen; and the earth covered over them, and they perished from the midst of the assembly.
Yet all Israel who were around them fled at their voice, for they said: Lest the earth swallow us up.
Then fire came forth from YHVH and devoured the two hundred fifty men who were bringing near the incense.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to Eleazar son of Aaron the priest that he should raise up the fire-pans from between the burning place; as for the fire, toss it yonder, for holy are
the fire-pans of these sinners against their own souls. And they will make of them stamped foils into an overlay for the altar; for since they brought them near before YHVH, they shall be holy and shall become as a sign to the sons of Israel.
Eleazar the priest took the copper fire-pans which those burned had brought near, and they stamped them into an overlay for the altar,
a reminder for the sons of Israel so that no alien man who is not of the seed of Aaron might come near to try to fume incense before YHVH so that he does not become as Korah and his congregation, just as YHVH had spoken to him by means of Moses.
The whole congregation of the sons of Israel grumbled on the morrow against Moses and against Aaron, saying: You yourselves put the people of YHVH to death.
It came to be, when the congregation assembled against Moses and against Aaron and they turned around toward the tent of appointment, that, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of YHVH appeared.
When Moses and Aaron came before the tent of appointment,
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Get away from the midst of this congregation so that I may finish them in a moment. Then they fell on their faces.
Moses said to Aaron: Take the fire-pan and put fire from the altar on it and place incense on it and go quickly to the congregation and make a propitiatory shelter over them, for wrath goes forth from before YHVH! The stroke has started!
So Aaron took it, just as Moses had spoken, and ran into the midst of the assembly. And behold, the stroke had started among the people. He put the incense on and make a propitiatory shelter over the people.
He stood between the dead and the living, and the stroke was restrained.
Now those dead by the stroke were fourteen thousand seven hundred, aside from those dead over the matter of Korah.
Then Aaron returned to Moses at the opening of the tent of appointment; as for the stroke, it was restrained.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel and take from them a rod, a rod for the father's house from all their princes by their fathers' house, twelve rods. For each man you shall write his name on his rod.
And the name of Aaron shall you write on the rod of Levi, for one rod is for the head of their fathers' house.
Then you will leave them in the tent of appointment before the testimony where I keep appointment with you.
So it will come to be that the man whom I choose, his rod shall bud. Thus I will cause the grumblings of the sons of Israel to subside from over Me which they were grumbling against you.
So Moses spoke to the sons of Israel, and all their princes gave a rod to him, a rod for each prince, for each prince, by their fathers' house, twelve rods in all. And the rod of Aaron was in the midst of their rods.
Moses left the rods before YHVH in the tent of the testimony.
It came to be on the morrow that Moses came into the tent of the testimony, and behold, the rod of Aaron of the house of Levi had budded. It brought forth buds and blossomed blossoms and requited with almonds.
Moses brought forth all the rods from before YHVH to all the sons of Israel. They saw, and each man took his rod.
Then YHVH said to Moses: Restore the rod of Aaron before the testimony for safekeeping as a sign for the sons of rebellion so that you may end their grumblings against Me so that they may not die.
Moses did just as YHVH had instructed him. So did he.
The sons of Israel spoke to Moses, saying: Behold, we expire! We perish! All of us perish!
Everyone who comes near, yea near to the tabernacle of YHVH shall die! Should we all come to end by expiring?
YHVH said to Aaron: You and your sons and your father's house with you shall bear any depravity committed against the sanctuary, and you and your sons with you shall bear any depravity in connection with your priesthood.
Moreover, bring near with you your brothers of the stock of Levi, the tribe of your father, that they may be obligated to you and may minister to you when you and your sons with you are before the tent of the testimony.
They will keep guard of you and guard of the entire tent; only to the furnishings of the holy place and to the altar they shall not come near so that they may not die, both they and you.
They will be obligated to you and will keep guard of the tent of appointment for all the service of the tent. Yet no alien may come near to you.
You will keep guard of the holy place and guard of the altar so that no more wrath shall come on the sons of Israel.
As for Me, behold, I have taken your brothers, the Levites, from the midst of the sons of Israel as a gift for you, given to YHVH to serve in the service of the tent of appointment.
Yet you and your sons with you shall keep your priesthood as to every matter of the altar and to that inside the curtain. Thus you will serve in the service. As a gift am I giving your priesthood. Yet the alien who comes near shall be put to death.
YHVH spoke to Aaron: As for Me, behold, I give you charge of My heave offerings of all the holy gifts of the sons of Israel. To you I give them for a share of the anointing, and to your sons, as an eonian statute.
This shall become yours from the holy of holies, reserved from the fire of all their approach present, all their approach present and all their sin offering and all their guilt offering which they are restoring to Me; it will be a holy of holies for you and for your sons.
As a holy of holies shall you eat it; every male shall eat of it. It shall be holy for you.
This also is yours as a heave offering share of their gifts: all the wave offerings of the sons of Israel. To you I give them and to your sons and to your daughters with you as an eonian statute. Everyone who is clean in your household may eat of it.
All the best of the clarified oil and all the best of the grape juice and the grain; their firstfruit which they shall give to YHVH, to you I give them.
The firstfruits of all that is in their land which they shall bring to YHVH shall be yours. Everyone who is clean in your household may eat it.
Every devoted thing in Israel shall be yours.
Every male opening up the womb of all flesh which they may bring near to YHVH of human and of beast shall be yours. Only you shall ransom, yea ransom the firstborn of humans, and the firstborn of an unclean beast shall you ransom.
As for his ransom, from a month old up shall you take ransom by your appraisal with five silver shekels by the shekel of the holy place. It is twentieth of a gerah.
Only the firstborn of kine or the firstborn of sheep or the firstborn of goats you shall not ransom. They are holy. Their blood you shall sprinkle against the altar, and their fat you shall cause to fume as a fire offering for a fragrant odor to YHVH.
Yet their flesh shall be yours, like the chest of the wave offering, and like the right leg shall it be yours.
All the heave offering shares of the holy gifts which the sons of Israel shall raise up to YHVH I give to you and to your sons and to your daughters with you as an eonian statute. An eonian covenant of salt shall it be before YHVH, for you and for your seed with you.
YHVH said to Aaron: In their land you shall not have an allotment, nor shall a portion be yours in their midst. I am your portion and your allotment in the midst of the sons of Israel.
As for the sons of Levi, behold, I give all the tithe in Israel as an allotment in exchange for their service in which they are serving, the service of the tent of appointment.
The sons of Israel shall not come near again to the tent of appointment to bear sin so as to die.
He, the Levite, will serve in the service of the tent of appointment, and they shall bear any depravity of theirs. It shall be an eonian statute throughout your generations so that in the midst of the sons of Israel they shall not be allotted an allotment,
for it is the tithe of the sons of Israel which they shall raise up as a heave offering to YHVH which I give to the Levites as an allotment. Therefore I say concerning them: No allotment in the midst of the sons of Israel shall they be allotted.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
As for the Levites, you shall speak and say to them: When you take from the sons of Israel the tithe which I give to you from them as your allotment, then you will raise up from it as a heave offering to YHVH, a tenth of the tithe.
Your heave offering will be reckoned to you like the grain from the threshing site and like the fullness from the wine vat.
So shall you also raise up the heave offering of YHVH from all your tithes which you take from the sons of Israel; and from it you will offer the heave offering of YHVH to Aaron the priest.
From all your gifts you shall raise up the whole heave offering of YHVH of all its best, its hallowed part, from it.
And you will say to them: When you raise up its best from it, then it will be reckoned to the Levites like the yield of the threshing site and like the yield of the wine vat.
And you may eat it in any place, you and your households, for it is your hire, in exchange for your service in the tent of appointment.
You shall not bear sin on account of it when you have raised up its best from it; thus you do not violate the holy things of the sons of Israel, nor shall you die.
YHVH spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying:
This is the statute of the law which YHVH has instructed, saying, Speak to the sons of Israel that they should take for you a red, flawless young cow in which there is no blemish, on which no yoke has gone up.
You will give her to Eleazar the priest, and he will bring her forth to outside the camp, and one will slay her before him.
Eleazar the priest will take some of her blood on his finger and spatter some of her blood seven times ahead toward the face of the tent of appointment.
Then one will burn the young cow before his eyes, her hide and her flesh and her blood. Over her dung shall one burn her.
The priest will take cedar wood, hyssop and double-dipped crimson yarn and fling them into the midst of the burning place of the young cow.
Then the priest will rinse his garments and bathe his flesh in water; afterward he may come into the camp; but the priest will be unclean until the evening.
And the one burning her shall rinse his garments in water and bathe his flesh in water. He too will be unclean until the evening.
Then a clean man will gather the ashes of the young cow and leave them outside the camp in a clean place. And they will be for safekeeping for the congregation of the sons of Israel for water of impurity; they are a burnt sin offering.
The one gathering the ashes of the young cow will rinse his garments and will be unclean until the evening. This will be an eonian statute for the sons of Israel and for the sojourner sojourning in their midst:
The one touching the dead body of any human soul will be unclean seven days.
He shall purify himself from sin with it on the third day; then on the seventh day he shall be clean. And if he does not purify himself from sin on the third day, then on the seventh day he shall not be clean.
Anyone touching a dead body, a human soul who died, and who does not purify himself from sin defiles the tabernacle of YHVH; that soul will be cut off from Israel, for water of impurity was not sprinkled on him. He shall be unclean; his uncleanness will still be in him.
This is the law in case a human should die in a tent: Everyone entering the tent and everyone who is in the tent shall be unclean seven days.
Every open vessel on which there is no leather-cap fastened with twine, it is unclean.
Anyone who touches, on the surface of the field, one wounded to death by the sword or a dead body or a human bone or a tomb, he shall be unclean seven days.
They will take for the unclean from the soil of the burning place of the sin offering and put living water on it in a vessel.
A clean man will take hyssop, dip it in the water and spatter it on the tent and on all the vessels and on the souls which are there and on the one touching a bone or one wounded to death or a dead body or a tomb.
The clean one will spatter on the unclean on the third day and on the seventh day and thus expiate him on the seventh day. He will then rinse his garments and bathe in water and will be clean in the evening.
If anyone who is unclean does not purify himself from sin, then that soul will be cut off from the midst of the assembly, for the sanctuary of YHVH has he defiled; water of impurity was not sprinkled on him, he is unclean.
It will be to them an eonian statute that the one spattering the water of impurity shall also rinse his garments, and the one touching the water of impurity shall be unclean until the evening.
All that the unclean one touches is unclean, and the soul of the one touching shall be unclean until the evening.
The sons of Israel, the whole congregation, entered the wilderness of Zin in the first month, and the people dwelt at Kadesh. Miriam died there and was entombed there.
Now no water was for the congregation, and they assembled against Moses and against Aaron.
The people contended with Moses and spoke, saying: O that we had expired when our brothers expired before YHVH!
Why did you bring the assembly of YHVH to this wilderness to die there, we and our livestock?
And why did you lead us up from Egypt to bring us to this bad place? This is not a place of seed, fig, vine or pomegranate, and there is not even water to drink.
When Moses and Aaron came from the presence of the assembly to the opening of the tent of appointment and fell on their faces, then the glory of YHVH appeared to them.
And YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Take the rod and assemble the congregation, you and Aaron your brother; speak to the crag before their eyes, and it will give its water. Thus you will bring forth water for them from the crag and will give drink to the congregation and their livestock.
So Moses took the rod from before YHVH just as He had instructed him.
Moses and Aaron assembled the assembly before the crag, and he said to them: Hear, I pray, you rebels! From this crag shall we bring forth water for you?
When Moses raised up his hand and smote the crag with his rod twice, then much water came forth, and the congregation and their livestock drank.
Yet YHVH said to Moses and to Aaron: Because you did not believe in Me to sanctify Me before the eyes of the sons of Israel, therefore you shall not bring this assembly into the land which I will give to them.
These were the waters of Meribah where the sons of Israel contended with YHVH, and He showed Himself holy among them.
Moses sent messengers from Kadesh to the king of Edom: Thus says your brother Israel, You know yourself all the stress which finds us
and that our fathers went down to Egypt, and we dwelt in Egypt many days and that the Egyptians did evil to us and to our fathers.
We cried to YHVH, and He heard our voice and sent a messenger and brought us forth from Egypt. Now behold, we are at Kadesh, a city at your outmost boundary.
Let us pass, we pray, through your land. We shall not pass through field or vineyard, nor shall we drink water of a well. By the king's road shall we go. We shall not turn aside right or left until we have crossed over your boundary.
Yet Edom said to him: You shall not pass through me lest I come forth with the sword to meet you.
Then the sons of Israel said to him: By the highway shall we go up. And if we drink your water, I and my cattle, then I will give its selling price. But this is no great matter. Let me pass on my feet.
Yet he said: You shall not pass. Then Edom came forth to meet him, heavy with people and with a steadfast hand.
Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his boundary; so Israel turned aside from him.
The sons of Israel, the whole congregation, journeyed from Kadesh and came to Mount Hor.
YHVH spoke to Moses and to Aaron at Mount Hor on the boundary of the land of Edom, saying:
Aaron shall be gathered to his people, for he shall not come to the land which I will give to the sons of Israel, because you rebelled against My bidding at the waters of Meribah.
Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and bring them up to Mount Hor.
Strip Aaron of his garments and put them on Eleazar his son. As for Aaron, he shall be gathered and will die there.
Moses did just as YHVH had instructed. They went up to Mount Hor before the eyes of the whole congregation.
Moses stripped Aaron of his garments and put them on Eleazar his son; and Aaron died there on the summit of the mountain. When Moses and Eleazar descended from the mountain,
the whole congregation discerned that Aaron had expired. They lamented for Aaron thirty days, all the house of Israel.
When the Canaanite king of Arad, dwelling in the Negev, heard that Israel was coming by way of Atharim, he fought against Israel and captured captives from him.
Israel vowed a vow to YHVH and said: If You give, yea give this people into my hand then I will doom their cities.
YHVH heard the voice of Israel and gave the Canaanite into his hand. So he doomed them and their cities; hence one called the name of the place Hormah.
They journeyed from Mount Hor by way of the Sea of Weeds to get around the land of Edom. And the soul of the people was impatient on the way.
The people spoke against God and against Moses: Why did you bring us up from Egypt to die in the wilderness? For there is no bread and there in no water, and our soul is irritated by the lightly esteemed bread.
So YHVH sent burning serpents among the people; they bit the people, and many people of Israel died.
The people came to Moses and said: We have sinned, for we have spoken against YHVH and against you. Pray to YHVH that He may take the serpents away from us. So Moses prayed about the people.
YHVH said to Moses: Make for yourself a burning serpent and place it on a banner pole; and it will come to be that anyone bitten, when he sees it, will live.
Moses made a serpent of copper and placed it on the banner pole, and it came to be that if a serpent had bitten anyone, when he looked to the copper serpent he lived.
The sons of Israel journeyed and encamped in Oboth.
Then they journeyed from Oboth and encamped in Iyim of the Abarim, in the wilderness which is adjoining Moab from the sunrise.
From there they journeyed and encamped in the watercourse of Zered.
From there they journeyed and encamped across the Arnon, which is in the wilderness going forth from the boundary of the Amorite, (for the Arnon is the boundary of Moab between Moab and the Amorite.
Therefore it is said in the Scroll of the Wars of YHVH: The gushing river at the terminus! And the watercourses of Arnon!
The slope of the watercourses which stretches out to the seat of Ar, and leans to the boundary of Moab,)
and from there toward Beer (the same is the well of which YHVH said to Moses: Gather the people so that I may give water to them;
then Israel sang this song: Come up, O well! Respond to it;
a well chiefs delved it, patrons of the people dug it with a statute-maker's staff, with their own staves) and from the wilderness to Mattanah,
and from Mattanah to Nahaliel and from Nahaliel to Bamoth,
and from Bamoth to the ravine which is in the field of Moab, the summit of the Pisgah ridge that gazes over the surface of the desolation.
Israel sent messengers to Sihon king of the Amorite with words of peace, saying:
Let me pass through your land. We shall not turn aside into field or into vineyard. We shall not drink water of any well. By the king's road shall we go until we cross over your boundary.
Yet Sihon would not allow Israel to cross over at his boundary. Sihon gathered all his people and went forth to meet Israel toward the wilderness. He came to Jahaz and fought against Israel.
Yet Israel smote him with the edge of the sword and tenanted his land from the Arnon as far as the Jabbok, as far as the sons of Ammon, for the boundary of the sons of Ammon was Jazer.
Israel took all these cities. Israel also dwelt in all the cities of the Amorite, in Heshbon and in all its outskirts,
for Heshbon, it was a city of Sihon king of the Amorite. He had fought against the former king of Moab and had taken all his land from his hand as far as the Arnon.
Therefore those discoursers say: Come to Heshbon, let it be rebuilt, and let the city of Sihon establish itself.
For a fire came forth from Heshbon, a blaze from the town of Sihon. It devoured Ar of Moab, the possessors of the fane heights of Arnon.
Woe to you, Moab! You have perished, people of Chemosh! He gave up his sons delivered from slaughter, and his daughters into captivity to Sihon, king of the Amorite.
We shot them; Heshbon perished as far as Dibon; we caused desolation until the fire was blown as far as Medeba.
When Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorite,
Moses sent men to spy out Jazer. They seized its outskirts and evicted the Amorite who was there.
Then they turned around and went up by the Bashan road. Og king of Bashan went forth to meet them, he and all his people, for battle at Edrei.
Now YHVH said to Moses: Do not fear him, for into your hand I give him and all his people and his land. You will do to him just as you did to Sihon king of the Amorite who was dwelling in Heshbon.
So they smote him and his sons and all his people until no survivor at all remained for him; and they tenanted his land.
Then the sons of Israel journeyed and encamped in the plains of Moab along the Jordan across from Jericho.
Balak son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the Amorite,
and Moab shrank in view of the people exceedingly, for they were numerous. Since Moab was irritated in view of the sons of Israel,
Moab said to the elders of Midian: Now this assembly shall lick up all around us like a bull licks up the green grass of the field. So Balak son of Zippor who was king of Moab at that time
sent messengers to Balaam son of Beor at Pethor (which is on the Stream in the land of the sons of his people) to call for him, saying: Behold, a people has come forth from Egypt. Behold, they cover the eye of the land, and they are dwelling at my forefront.
Now come, I pray, curse this people for me, for they are more substantial than I. Perhaps I shall prevail, so that we may smite them and I may drive them out from the land, for I know that whomever you bless is being blessed and whomever you curse is accursed.
The elders of Moab and the elders of Midian went with the pay for divinations in their hands. They came to Balaam and spoke to him the words of Balak.
He said to them: Lodge here for the night, and I will bring back word to you just as YHVH shall speak to me. So the chiefs of Moab dwelt with Balaam.
Now God came to Balaam and said: Who are these men with you?
And Balaam said to the One, God: Balak son of Zippor, king of Moab, sent them to me, saying:
Behold, the people coming forth from Egypt are covering the eye of the land! Now go, revile him for me. Perhaps I shall be able to fight him, and I will drive him out.
Then God said to Balaam: You shall not go with them; you shall not curse the people, for it is blessed.
Balaam rose in the morning and said to the chiefs of Balak: Go back to your land, for YHVH has refused to allow me to go with you.
So the chiefs of Moab rose and came to Balak and said: Balaam refused to go with us.
Balak continued further to send other chiefs, more numerous and illustrious than these.
They came to Balaam and said to him: Thus says Balak son of Zippor, Do not, I pray, be withheld from coming to me,
for I shall glorify, yea glorify you exceedingly, and all that you may say to me I shall do. So come now I pray, revile this people for me.
Yet Balaam answered and said to the servants of Balak: If Balak were giving to me the fullness of his house in silver and gold I could not cross the bidding of YHVH my God to do what is small or great.
Yet now dwell, I pray, you too, in this place, for the night; then I shall know what YHVH shall continue to speak with me.
God came to Balaam at night and said to him: Since the men have come to call for you, rise, go with them. Yet only the word that I speak to you, only it shall you use.
Balaam rose in the morning and saddled his jenny and went with the chiefs of Moab.
God's anger grew hot because he was going. So a messenger of YHVH stationed himself in the road to be adverse to him. Now he was riding on his jenny, and his two lads were with him.
The jenny saw the messenger of YHVH stationed in the road with his drawn sword in his hand, so the jenny turned aside from the road and went into a field. Balaam smote the jenny to turn her aside into the road.
Then the messenger of YHVH stood in a lane between the vineyards with a stone dike on this side and a stone dike on that side.
The jenny saw the messenger of YHVH and pressed herself close to the sidewall. When she pressed Balaam's foot close to the sidewall he continued to smite her.
Yet the messenger of YHVH continued to pass and stood in a narrow place in which there was no way to turn aside right or left.
The jenny saw the messenger of YHVH, and she reclined under Balaam. Balaam's anger grew hot, and he smote the jenny with a stick.
Then YHVH opened the mouth of the jenny, and she said to Balaam: What have I done to you that you have smitten me these three times?
And Balaam said to the jenny: Because you abused me! O that there were a sword in my hand, for I would kill you right now.
The jenny said to Balaam: Am I not your jenny on which you have ridden from your youth until this day? Have I been accustomed, yea accustomed to do thus to you? And he said: No.
YHVH exposed the eyes of Balaam so that he saw the messenger of YHVH stationed in the road with his drawn sword in his hand. So he bowed his head and bowed himself down, with his nostrils to the ground.
The messenger of YHVH said to him: On what grounds did you smite your jenny these three times? Behold, I myself came forth as your adversary, for your way in front of me is precipitant.
The jenny saw me and turned aside from before me these three times. Unless she had turned aside from before me surely just now I would have killed you, and I would have preserved her alive.
Then Balaam said to the messenger of YHVH: I was at fault, for I did not realize that you were stationed to meet me on the road. And now, if it is evil in your eyes let me return to mine.
The messenger of YHVH said to Balaam: Go with the men, yet only the word which I speak to you may you speak to him. So Balaam went with the chiefs of Balak.
When Balak heard that Balaam was coming, he went forth to meet him at Ar of Moab on the boundary of Arnon which was at the end of the territory.
Then Balak said to Balaam: Did I not send, yea send to you to call for you? Why did you not come to me? Am I truly not able to glorify you?
And Balaam said to Balak: Behold, I have come to you now. Can I prevail to speak anything freely? The word that God places in my mouth, it shall I speak.
So Balaam went with Balak, and they came to Kiriath-Huzoth.
Balak sacrificed from herd and flock and sent some to Balaam and to the chiefs who were with him.
It came to be in the morning that Balak took Balaam and brought him up to the fane heights of Baal that he might see from there the outmost part of the people.
Balaam said to Balak: Build for me in this place seven altars and prepare for me in this place seven young bulls and seven rams.
Balak did just as Balaam had spoken. Balak and Balaam offered up a young bull and a ram on each altar.
Then Balaam said to Balak: Station yourself at your ascent offering and let me go. Perhaps YHVH shall happen to meet me; then whatever word He shall show me I will tell you. So he went off to the ridge.
God met Balaam, and he said to Him: The seven altars have I arranged, and I offered up a young bull and a ram on each altar.
YHVH placed a word in the mouth of Balaam and said: Return to Balak and thus shall you speak.
So he returned to him and behold, he and all the chiefs of Moab were stationed at his ascent offering.
He took up his discourse and said: From Syria Balak gave me guidance, the king of Moab from the mountains of the east: Come now and curse Jacob for me! And come now and menace Israel.
How should I revile when El has not reviled him? How should I menace when YHVH has not menaced?
For from the summit of the rocks I am seeing him, and from the hills I am regarding him. Behold, the people is tabernacling by itself alone, and among the nations it is not reckoning itself.
Who counts the soil-drift of Jacob? And who numbers the dust cloud of Israel? May my soul die the death of the upright, and may my hereafter be just as his!
Then Balak said to Balaam: What have you done to me? To revile my enemies I took you, yet behold, you bless, yea bless them!
Yet he answered and said: What YHVH places in my mouth, is it not it that I should observe to speak?
Balak said to him: Go, I pray, with me to another place from where you may see it. Only its outmost part shall you see; all of it you shall not see. Revile it for me from there.
So he took him to the field of the Watchmen, to the summit of the Pisgah ridge. He built seven altars and offered up a young bull and a ram on each altar.
Then he said to Balak: Station yourself thus at your ascent offering while I meet Him thus.
YHVH met with Balaam and placed the word in his mouth and said: Return to Balak and thus shall you speak.
So he came to him, and behold, he was stationed at his ascent offering, and the chiefs of Moab with him. Balak said to him: What has YHVH spoken?
He took up his discourse and said: Arise, Balak, and hear! Give ear unto me, son of Zippor!
El is not a man that He should lie. Nor a son of humanity that He should feel regret. Does He say it and then not do it? Or speak and then not carry it out?
Behold, I undertake to bless; He blesses and I shall not reverse it:
He does not look for sorrow in Jacob, nor does He see toil in Israel. YHVH their God is with him, and the shout of their king is with him.
El, Who brought them forth from Egypt, was to him like a wild bull's cornuted strength.
For there is no augury against Jacob nor divination against Israel; at the right time it is spoken to Jacob and to Israel: What has El contrived!
Behold, the people arise like a parent lion, and like a lion lifts himself. He shall not lie down until he devours the prey and drinks the blood of those wounded to death.
Balak said to Balaam: If you shall not revile, yea revile him at all, you should also not bless, yea bless him at all!
Balaam responded and said to Balak: Did not I speak to you, saying: All that YHVH shall speak, it I shall do?
Balak said to Balaam: Come now, I pray. I shall take you to another place; perhaps it may be upright in the eyes of the One, God, that you revile him for me from there.
So Balak took Balaam to the summit of Peor, the one gazing over the surface of the desolation.
Then Balaam said to Balak: Build for me in this place seven altars, and prepare for me in this place seven young bulls and seven rams.
Balak did just as Balaam had said and offered up a young bull and a ram on each altar.
Balaam saw that it was good in the eyes of YHVH to bless Israel so he did not go out, as he had done time upon time, to meet auguries, yet set his face toward the wilderness.
When Balaam lifted his eyes and saw Israel tabernacling by its tribes, then the spirit of God came on him.
He took up his discourse and said: The averring of Balaam son of Beor, and the averring of the master with his eye obstructed;
the averring of the one hearing the sayings of El, Who is perceiving a vision from Him Who-Suffices, falling prostrate, yet his eyes are revealed.
How good are your tents, O Jacob! Your tabernacles, O Israel!
Like the watercourses are they stretched out, like gardens along a stream, like the aloes YHVH has planted, like the cedars beside the waters.
Water flows from its irrigation buckets, so its seed is among abundant waters. His king shall be higher than Agag, and his kingdom shall lift itself up.
El Who brought him forth from Egypt is to him as a wild bull's cornuted strength. He shall devour the nations, his foes, and pick their bones clean; His arrow shall transfix the enemy.
He crouches and lies down like a lion, and like a parent lion; who shall make him rise? Whoever is blessing you is blessed and whoever is cursing you is cursed.
Now Balak's anger grew hot against Balaam, and he slapped his palms together. Balak said to Balaam: To revile my enemies I called you, and behold, you have blessed, yea blessed them these three times!
And now get yourself away to your place! I said I would glorify, yea glorify you. Yet behold, YHVH has withheld you from glory.
Then Balaam said to Balak: Did I not speak also to your messengers whom you sent to me, saying:
If Balak were giving to me the fullness of his house in silver and gold, I could not cross the bidding of YHVH to do what is good or evil out of my own heart. Whatever YHVH shall speak, it shall I speak.
And now, behold me going to my people. Come now! I shall counsel you what this people shall do to your people in the latter days.
Then he took up his discourse and said: The averring of Balaam son of Beor, and the averring of the master with his eye obstructed;
the averring of the one hearing the sayings of El and realizing the knowledge of the Supreme. He is perceiving a vision from Him Who-Suffices, falling prostrate, yet his eyes are revealed.
I see him yet not now, I regard him yet not near. A star will tread forth from Jacob; a scepter will arise from Israel, and he will transfix both edges of Moab, and the scalp of all the sons of tumult.
Edom will become a tenancy, even Seir will become a tenancy of its enemies; yet Israel will do ably.
One from Jacob shall hold sway, and will destroy the survivors of the city.
When he saw Amalek, he took up his discourse and said: First of the nations was Amalek, yet his hereafter will lead unto perishing.
When he saw the Kenite, he took up his discourse and said: Perennial is your dwelling, and set high in a crag is your nest.
But rather shall Cain come to eradication; how long until Asshur shall capture you?
Then he took up his discourse and said: Woe! Who shall live when El lays it down?
And those going forth from the hand of Kittim will humiliate Assyria and humiliate Eber. Yet he, too, will come unto perishing.
Then Balaam arose and went away and returned to his place. And Balak also went his way.
While Israel dwelt in Shittim, the people started to commit prostitution with the daughters of Moab,
who called the people to the sacrifices of their God. The people ate their sacrifices and bowed themselves down to their God.
Thus Israel was paired with Baal-peor, and the anger of YHVH grew hot against Israel.
YHVH said to Moses: Take all heads of the people and gibbet them before YHVH in front of the sun so that the heat of YHVH's anger might turn back from Israel.
So Moses said to the judges of Israel: Kill each one his men who are pairing themselves with Baal-peor.
Behold, a man from the sons of Israel was coming in, and he brought near to his brothers a Midianite woman before the eyes of Moses and before the eyes of the whole congregation of the sons of Israel while they were lamenting at the opening of the tent of appointment.
When Phineas, son of Eleazar, son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he arose from the midst of the congregation and took a lance in his hand.
He came after the man of Israel to the alcove and stabbed the two of them, the man of Israel and the woman, into her pelvis. Then the stroke was restrained from the sons of Israel.
Those dying in the stroke were twenty-four thousand.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Phineas, son of Eleazar, son of Aaron the priest, reversed My fury from the sons of Israel in his zeal for My jealousy in their midst so I did not finish the sons of Israel in My jealousy.
Therefore say: Behold Me giving to him My covenant of peace;
it will be his and his seed's after him, the covenant of an eonian priesthood, inasmuch as he was zealous for his God and made a propitiatory shelter over the sons of Israel.
The name of the smitten man of Israel, who was smitten with the Midianite woman, was Zimri son of Salu, a prince of a father's house of the Simeonite.
And the name of the smitten Midianite woman was Cozbi daughter of Zur. He was a head of clans of a father's house in Midian.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Distress the Midianites and smite them,
for they were distressing you in their plots which they plotted against you over the matter of Peor and over the matter of their sister Cozbi, daughter of a prince of Midian, who was smitten on the day of the stroke over the matter of Peor.
It came to be after the stroke
that YHVH spoke to Moses and to Eleazar son of Aaron the priest, saying:
Obtain the sum of the whole congregation of the sons of Israel from twenty years old and upward, by their fathers' house, everyone going forth with the militia host in Israel.
So Moses and Eleazar the priest spoke with them in the plains of Moab along the Jordan, across from Jericho, saying:
From twenty years old and upward just as YHVH had instructed Moses. The sons of Israel who had come forth from the land of Egypt were:
Reuben, firstborn of Israel, and the sons of Reuben: through Hanoch, the Hanochite family; through Pallu the Palluite family;
through Hezron the Hezronite family; through Carmi the Carmite family.
These were the Reubenite families. Their mustered ones were forty-three thousand seven hundred thirty.
The sons of Pallu were Eliab
and the sons of Eliab, Nemuel, Dathan and Abiram. The same Dathan and Abiram were the called of the congregation who strove against Moses and against Aaron in the congregation of Korah when they strove against YHVH
and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them up with Korah in the death of that congregation when the fire devoured two hundred fifty men, and they became like a warning banner.
Yet the sons of Korah did not die.
The sons of Simeon by their families: through Nemuel the Nemuelite family; through Jamin the Jaminite family; through Jachin the Jachinite family;
through Zerah the Zerahite family; through Shaul the Shaulite family.
These were the Simeonite families, twenty-two thousand two hundred.
The sons of Gad by their families: through Zephon the Zephonite family; through Haggi the Haggite family; through Shuni the Shunite family;
through Ozni the Oznite family; through Eri the Erite family;
through Arod the Arodite family; through Areli the Arelite family.
These were the families of the sons of Gad by their mustered ones, forty thousand five hundred.
The sons of Judah were Er and Onan. Now Er and Onan had died in the land of Canaan.
The sons of Judah were, by their families: through Shelah the Shelanite family; through Perez the Perezite family; through Zerah the Zerahite family.
The sons of Perez were: through Hezron the Hezronite family; through Hamul the Hamulite family.
These were the families of Judah by their mustered ones, seventy-six thousand five hundred.
The sons of Issachar by their families: through Tola the Tolaite family; through Puah the Puanite family;
through Jashub the Jashubite family; through Shimron the Shimronite family.
These were the families of Issachar by their mustered ones, sixty-four thousand three hundred.
The sons of Zebulun by their families: through Sered the Seredite family; through Elon the Elonite family; through Jahleel the Jahleelite family;
These were the families of the Zebulunite by their mustered ones, sixty thousand five hundred.
The sons of Joseph by their families: Manasseh and Ephraim.
The sons of Manasseh were: through Machir the Machirite family, and Machir begat Gilead; through Gilead the Gileadite family.
These were the sons of Gilead: through Jezer the Jezerite family; through Helek the Helekite family;
through Asriel the Asrielite family; through Shechem the Shechemite family;
through Shemida the Shemidaite family; through Hepher the Hepherite family.
Zelophehad son of Hepher came to have no sons but rather daughters. And the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were: Malhah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah and Tirzah.
These were the families of Manasseh by their mustered ones, fifty two thousand seven hundred.
These were the sons of Ephraim by their families: through Shuthelah the Shuthelahite family; through Becher the Becherite family, through Tahan the Tahanite family. These were the sons of Shuthelah:
through Eran the Eranite family.
These were the families of the sons of Ephraim by their mustered ones, thirty-two thousand five hundred. These were the sons of Joseph by their families.
The sons of Benjamin by their families: through Bela the Belaite family; through Ashbel the Ashbelite family; through Ahiram the Ahiramite family;
through Shupham the Shuphamite family; through Hupham the Huphamite family.
The sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: through Ard the Ardite family; through Naaman the Naamite family.
These were the sons of Benjamin by their families, and their mustered ones were forty-five thousand six hundred.
These were the sons of Dan by their families: through Shuham the Shuhamite family. These were the families of Dan by their families.
All the families of the Shuhamites by their mustered ones were sixty-four thousand four hundred.
The sons of Asher by their families: through Jimna the Jimnite family; through Ishvi the Ishvite family; through Beriah the Beriite family,
through sons of Beriah, through Heber the Heberite family; through Malchiel the Malchielite family.
And the name of the daughter of Asher was Sherach.
These were the families of the sons of Asher by their mustered ones, fifty-three thousand four hundred.
The sons of Naphtali by their families: through Jahzeel the Jahzeelite family; through Guni the Gunite family;
through Jezer the Jezerite family; through Shillem the Shillemite family.
These were the families of Naphtali by their families, and their mustered ones were forty-five thousand four hundred.
These were the mustered ones of the sons of Israel: six hundred one thousand seven hundred thirty.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
To these the land shall be apportioned by allotment by the number of names.
For the numerous one you shall increase his allotment, and for the little one you shall decrease his allotment. Each corresponding to their mustered ones shall be given his allotment.
Only, by lot shall the land be apportioned. By the names of their fathers' stocks shall they be allotted.
At the bidding of the lot you shall apportion each his allotment, between the numerous one and the little one.
These were the mustered ones of the Levites by their families: through Gershon the Gershonite family; through Kohath the Kohathite family; through Merari the Merarite family.
These were the families of the sons of Levi: the Libnite family, the Hebronite family, the Mahlite family, the Mushite family and the Korathite family. Kohath begot Amram;
and the name of Amram's wife was Jochebed, a Levite daughter who was born to the Levite in Egypt. And she bore for Amram Aaron and Moses and Miriam, their sister.
To Aaron was born Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
Yet Nadab and Abihu died when they offered alien fire before YHVH.
Their mustered ones were twenty-three thousand, every male from a month old and upward, for they did not present themselves to be mustered for militia service in the midst of the sons of Israel, for no allotment was given to them in the midst of the sons of Israel.
These were the mustered ones of Moses and Eleazar the priest who mustered the sons of Israel in the plains of Moab along the Jordan across from Jericho.
Yet among these not a man came to be from the mustering of Moses and Aaron the priest when they had mustered the sons of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai,
for YHVH had said to them that they would die, yea die in the wilderness. And not a man of them was left save Caleb son of Jephunneh and Joshua son of Nun.
Then the daughters of Zelophehad son of Hepher, son of Gilead, son of Machir, son of Manasseh, of the families of Manasseh son of Joseph, came near. These were the names of his daughters: Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah and Tirzah.
They stood before Moses and before Eleazar the priest, and before the princes and the whole congregation at the opening of the tent of appointment, saying:
Our father, he died in the wilderness, yet he was not in the midst of the congregation of those set against YHVH in the congregation of Korah, but he died for his own sin, and sons he did not come to have.
Why should the name of our father be disadvantaged from the midst of his family because he had no son? Give now to us a holding in the midst of our father's brothers.
So Moses brought near their plea before YHVH.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Properly the daughters of Zelophehad are speaking. You shall give, yea give to them a holding for an allotment in the midst of the brothers of their father, and you will cause the allotment of their father to pass to them.
And to the sons of Israel you shall speak, saying: In case a man dies and he has no son then you will cause his allotment to pass on to his daughter.
If he has no daughter then you will give his allotment to his brothers;
and if he has no brothers then you will give his allotment to the brothers of his father.
If his father had no brothers then you will give his allotment to his kin, the one nearest to him in his family, and he will tenant it. And it will come to be to the sons of Israel for a statute of judgment, just as YHVH has instructed Moses.
YHVH said to Moses: Go up to this mount of the Abarim range and see the land which I give to the sons of Israel.
When you have seen it you will be gathered to your people, you too, just as Aaron your brother was gathered.
Just as in the contention of the congregation both of you rebelled against My bidding in the wilderness of Zin to sanctify Me at the waters before their eyes. (These were the waters of Meribah at Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin.)
Moses spoke to YHVH, saying:
May YHVH God of the spirits for all flesh give supervision over the congregation to a man
who may go forth before them and enter before them, and who may bring them forth and bring them in so that the congregation of YHVH shall not become like a flock for whom there is no shepherd.
YHVH said to Moses: Take to you Joshua son of Nun, a man in whom there is spirit, and support your hands on him;
have him stand before Eleazar the priest and before the whole congregation and instruct him before their eyes.
Put some of your prestige on him so that the whole congregation of the sons of Israel may hearken to him.
And before Eleazar the priest shall he stand, and he will ask for him the judgment of the Urim before YHVH. At his bidding shall they go forth and at his bidding they shall enter, he and all the sons of Israel with him, the whole congregation.
Moses did just as YHVH had instructed him. He took Joshua and had him stand him before Eleazar the priest and before the whole congregation.
Then he supported his hands on him and instructed him, just as YHVH had spoken by means of Moses.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Instruct the sons of Israel and say to them: My approach present, My bread for My fire offerings, My fragrant odor shall you observe to bring near to Me at its appointed time.
You will say to them: This is the fire offering which you shall bring near to YHVH, flawless year-old he-lambs, two per day, a regular ascent offering.
The one he-lamb shall you offer in the morning, and the second he-lamb shall you offer between the evening hours,
with a tenth of an ephah of flour as an approach present mingled with pounded oil, a fourth of a hin.
It is the regular ascent offering instituted at Mount Sinai for a fragrant odor, a fire offering, to YHVH.
Its libation is a fourth of a hin for one he-lamb. In the holy place, libate an intoxicating libation to YHVH.
And the second he-lamb you shall offer between the evening hours; like the approach present of the morning and like its libation shall you make it as a fire offering, a fragrant odor to YHVH.
On the sabbath day you shall bring near two flawless year-old he-lambs, and two-tenths of an ephah of flour, an approach present mingled with oil, with its libation.
This is the sabbath ascent offering on its sabbath along with the regular ascent offering with its libation.
At the beginnings of your months you shall bring near an ascent offering to YHVH: two young bulls, calves of the herd, and one ram, seven flawless year-old he-lambs,
and three-tenths of an ephah of flour as an approach present mingled with oil for each young bull; and two-tenths of an ephah of flour as an approach present mingled with oil for the one ram,
and a tenth by a tenth of an ephah of flour as an approach present mingled with oil for each he-lamb. This is an ascent offering, a fragrant odor, a fire offering, to YHVH.
As for their libations, half a hin shall there be for each young bull and a third of a hin for the one ram and a fourth of a hin of wine for each he-lamb. This is the ascent offering month by its month for the months of the year.
Also one hairy one of the goats as a sin offering to YHVH along with the regular ascent offering shall be made with its libation.
In the first month on the fourteenth day of the month is the passover to YHVH.
And on the fifteenth day of this month is a celebration. For seven days unleavened cakes shall be eaten.
On the first day is a holy meeting when you shall do no occupational work at all.
You will bring near a fire offering, an ascent offering to YHVH, two young bulls, calves of the herd, one ram and seven year-old he-lambs; flawless shall they be for you.
And as their approach present of flour mingled with oil, three tenths per young bull and two tenths per ram shall you offer.
A tenth by a tenth shall you offer for each he-lamb of the seven lambs.
Also there is one hairy one of the goats as a sin offering to make a propitiatory shelter over you;
aside from the ascent offering of the morning which is the regular ascent offering you shall offer these.
Like these shall you offer daily for seven days, the bread of the fire offering for a fragrant odor to YHVH; along with the regular ascent offering shall it be made with its libation.
And on the seventh day you shall come to have a holy meeting when you shall do no occupational work at all.
On the day of the firstfruits when you bring near a new approach present to YHVH, in your feast of weeks, you shall come to have a holy meeting when you shall do no occupational work at all.
You will bring near an ascent offering for a fragrant odor to YHVH, two young bulls, calves of the herd, one ram, seven year-old he-lambs
with their approach present of flour mingled with oil, three tenths for each young bull and two tenths for the one ram.
A tenth by a tenth for each he-lamb of the seven he-lambs,
and one hairy one of the goats to make a propitiatory shelter over you,
aside from the regular ascent offering and its approach present you shall offer. Flawless shall they be for you, with their libations.
In the seventh month, on day one of the month you shall come to have a holy meeting when you shall do no occupational work at all; a day of trumpet blast shall you come to have.
You will make an ascent offering for a fragrant odor to YHVH, one young bull, a calf of the herd, one ram, seven flawless year-old he-lambs,
and their approach present of flour mingled with oil, three tenths for the young bull, two tenths for the ram
and one tenth for each he-lamb of the seven he-lambs,
and one hairy one of the goats as a sin offering to make a propitiatory shelter over you,
aside from the ascent offering of the month with its approach present and the regular ascent offering with its approach present and their libations, as is their custom, for a fragrant odor, a fire offering, to YHVH.
On the tenth of this seventh month you shall come to have a holy meeting, and you will humble your souls; you shall do no work at all.
You will bring near an ascent offering to YHVH, a fragrant odor, one young bull, a calf of the herd, one ram, seven year-old he-lambs (flawless shall they be for you),
and as their approach present of flour mingled with oil, three tenths for the young bull, two tenths for the one ram,
a tenth by a tenth for each he-lamb of the seven lambs,
and one hairy one of the goats as a sin offering aside from the sin offering of the propitiatory shelters and the regular ascent offering with its approach present and their libations.
On the fifteenth day of the seventh month you shall come to have a holy meeting when you shall do no occupational work at all, and you will celebrate a celebration to YHVH for seven days.
You will bring near an ascent offering, a fire offering of fragrant odor to YHVH: thirteen young bulls, calves of the herd, two rams, fourteen year-old he-lambs, (flawless shall they be),
and as their approach present of flour mingled with oil, three tenths for each young bull of the thirteen young bulls, two tenths for each ram of the two rams,
and a tenth by a tenth for each he-lamb of the fourteen he-lambs,
and one hairy one of the goats as a sin offering aside from the regular ascent offering with its approach present and its libation.
On the second day: twelve young bulls, calves of the herd, two rams, fourteen flawless year-old he-lambs,
and their approach present with their libations for the young bulls, for the rams and for the he-lambs, by their number as is the custom,
and one hairy one of the goats as a sin offering aside from the regular ascent offering with its approach present and their libations.
On the third day: eleven young bulls, two rams, fourteen flawless year-old he-lambs,
and their approach present with their libations for the young bulls, for the rams and for the he-lambs, by their number as is the custom,
and one hairy one of the goats as a sin offering aside from the regular ascent offering with its approach present and its libation.
On the fourth day; ten young bulls, two rams, fourteen flawless year-old he-lambs,
their approach present with their libations for the young bulls, for the rams and for the he-lambs by their number as is the custom,
and one hairy one of the goats as a sin offering aside from the regular ascent offering with its approach present and its libation.
On the fifth day: nine young bulls, two rams, fourteen flawless year-old he-lambs,
with their approach present and their libations for the young bulls, for the rams and for the he-lambs by their number as is the custom,
and one hairy one of the goats as a sin offering aside from the regular ascent offering with its approach present and its libation.
On the sixth day: eight young bulls, two rams, fourteen flawless year-old he-lambs,
with their approach present and their libations for the young bulls, for the rams and for the he-lambs by their number as is the custom,
and one hairy one of the goats as a sin offering aside from the regular ascent offering with its approach present and its libation.
On the seventh day: seven young bulls, two rams, fourteen flawless year-old he-lambs,
with their approach present and their libations for the young bulls, for the rams and for the he-lambs by their number as is the custom,
and one hairy one of the goats as a sin offering aside from the regular ascent offering, its approach present and its libation.
On the eighth day you shall come to have a time of restraint. No occupational work at all shall you do.
You will bring near an ascent offering, a fire offering of fragrant odor to YHVH: one young bull, one ram, seven flawless year-old he-lambs,
their approach present and their libations for the young bull, for the ram and for the he-lambs by their number as is the custom,
and one hairy one of the goats as a sin offering, aside from the regular ascent offering with its approach present and its libation.
These shall you offer to YHVH at your appointed times aside from your vows and your voluntary offerings for your ascent offerings, for approach presents, for your libations and for your peace offerings.
Thus Moses spoke to the sons of Israel according to all that YHVH had instructed Moses.
Moses spoke to the heads of the stocks of the sons of Israel, saying: This is the matter that YHVH has instructed:
In case a man vows a vow to YHVH or swears an oath to bind a bond on his soul, he shall not profane his word. According to all coming forth from his mouth shall he do.
And in case a woman vows a vow to YHVH and binds herself by a bond in the house of her father in her youth,
and her father hears about her vow or her bond which she has bound on her soul but her father is silent toward her, then all her vows are confirmed, and every bond which she has bound on her soul shall be confirmed.
Yet if her father repudiates her vow on the day he hears about it, all her vows and her bonds which she has bound on her soul shall not be confirmed, and YHVH will pardon her, seeing that her father repudiated her act.
If it be that she should become a man's while her vows are on her or the talk of her lips which she has bound on her soul,
and her husband hears about it, yet on the day he hears he is silent toward her, then all her vows are confirmed, and her bond which she has bound on her soul shall be confirmed.
Yet if, on the day her husband hears about it, he repudiates her act, then he annuls her vow which is on her or the talk of her lips which she has bound on her soul, and YHVH shall pardon her.
The vow of a widow or one driven out, all which she binds on her soul shall be confirmed on her.
Yet if, in the house of her husband, she vows or binds a bond on her soul by an oath,
and her husband hears about it but is silent toward her and does not repudiate her act, then all her vows are confirmed, and every bond which she has bound on her soul shall be confirmed.
Yet if her husband annuls, yea annuls them on the day he hears about them, then no utterance at all from her lips concerning her vows or the bond of her soul shall be confirmed. Her husband has annulled them, and YHVH shall pardon her.
Every vow and every oath of binding to humiliate the soul, her husband shall confirm it or her husband shall annul it.
And if her husband is silent, yea silent toward her from day to day then he confirms all her vows or all her bonds which are on her; he has confirmed them, for he was silent toward her on the day he heard about it.
Yet if he annuls, yea annuls them after he heard about it, then he will bear her depravity.
These are the statutes which YHVH had instructed Moses between a man and his wife and between a father and his daughter in her youth in her father's house.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Avenge the sons of Israel with vengeance on the Midianites; and afterward you shall be gathered to your people.
Then Moses spoke to the people, saying: Outfit men from among you as a militia host that they may come against Midian to deliver the vengeance of YHVH on Midian.
A thousand per stock, a thousand per stock from all the stocks of Israel shall you send as the militia host.
So they withdrew from the thousands of Israel a thousand per stock, twelve thousand outfitted as the militia host.
Then Moses sent them out, a thousand per stock, as the militia host, and with them Phineas son of Eleazar the priest for the militia host, with the furnishings of the sanctuary and the bugles for the blast in his hand.
They rallied against the Midian just as YHVH had instructed Moses, and they killed every male.
As for the kings of Midian, they killed them along with their men wounded to death: Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur and Reba, five kings of Midian. Also Balaam son of Beor they killed with the sword.
The sons of Israel captured the women of Midian and their little ones; they plundered all their beasts, all their cattle and all their estate.
All their walled cities with their dwellings and all their nomadic domiciles they burned with fire.
They took all the loot and all the booty, including human and beast.
Then they brought the captives and the booty and the loot, to Moses and to Eleazar the priest and to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, at the camp, on the plains of Moab which are along the Jordan across from Jericho.
Moses and Eleazar the priest and all the princes of the congregation went forth to meet them outside the camp.
Moses was wrathful with the officers of the army, chiefs of the thousands and chiefs of the hundreds, coming back from the militia host of the war.
And Moses said to them: You have kept every female alive?
Behold, they, by the word of Balaam, came to be for the sons of Israel the reason for a withdrawal from and an offense against YHVH in the matter of Peor, so that the stroke came to be in the congregation of YHVH.
And now, kill every male among the little ones, and every woman having known a man (at bed with a male), kill.
Yet every little one among the womenfolk who have not known bed with a male keep alive for yourselves.
As for you, encamp outside the camp seven days. All of you having killed a soul and all having touched a man wounded to death shall purify yourselves from sin on the third day and on the seventh day, both you and your captives;
and every garment and every article of leather and every handiwork of goats' hair and every article of wood shall you purify for yourselves from sin.
Eleazar the priest said to the men of the militia host who had come into the battle: This is the statute of the law which YHVH has instructed Moses.
Yea, the gold and the silver, the copper, the iron, the tin and the lead,
everything which may come through fire you shall cause to pass through fire, and it will be clean. Nevertheless, by the water of impurity shall it purify itself from sin. And everything which may not come through fire you shall cause to pass through water.
You will rinse your garments on the seventh day, and you will be clean. And thereafter you may come into the camp.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Obtain the sum of the booty, of the captives among human and among beast, you and Eleazar the priest and the heads of the fathers of the congregation.
And you will divide the booty between those handing the war, those going forth with the militia host, and the whole congregation.
Raise up an assessment for YHVH from the men of war, those going forth with the militia host: one soul out of five hundred from the human and from the beast, from the herd, from the donkeys and from the flock.
From their half-share shall you take it, and you will give it to Eleazar the priest as a heave offering to YHVH.
And from the half-share of the sons of Israel you shall take one to be withheld out of fifty, from the human, from the herd, from the donkeys and from the flock, from every beast, and you will give them to the Levites, the ones keeping charge of YHVH's tabernacle.
So Moses and Eleazar the priest did as YHVH had instructed Moses.
The booty, the rest of the plunder which the people of the militia host had plundered came to be: a flock of six hundred seventy-five thousand,
a herd of seventy-two thousand,
sixty-one thousand donkeys.
As for the human souls of womenfolk who had not known bed with a male, all the souls were thirty-two thousand.
The half-share, the portion of those going forth with the militia host, came to number a flock of three hundred thirty-seven thousand five hundred.
And the assessment for YHVH came to be, from the flock, six hundred seventy-five.
The herd was thirty-six thousand, and their assessment for YHVH was seventy-two.
The donkeys were thirty thousand five hundred, and their assessment for YHVH was sixty-one.
The human souls were sixteen thousand, and their assessment for YHVH was thirty-two souls.
Moses gave the assessment as a heave offering of YHVH, to Eleazar the priest, just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
As for the half-share of the sons of Israel which Moses had divided from that of the mustered militiamen,
the half-share of the congregation came to be, from the flock, three hundred thirty-seven thousand five hundred.
And the herd was thirty-six thousand,
the donkeys thirty thousand five hundred,
and the human souls sixteen thousand.
Moses took from the half-share of the sons of Israel one to be withheld out of fifty from the human and from the beast; and he gave them to the Levites, the ones keeping charge of YHVH's tabernacle just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
Then the officers who were for thousands of the militia host, the chiefs of thousands and the chiefs of hundreds, came near to Moses
and said to Moses: Your servants have obtained the total of the men of war who are under our hand, and not a man is missing from us.
So we have brought near as an approach present to YHVH, whatever articles of gold each man found: armlets and bracelets, rings, earrings and plaited ornaments to make a propitiatory shelter over our souls before YHVH.
Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold from them, all articles of handiwork.
All the gold of the heave offering which they raised up to YHVH was sixteen thousand seven hundred fifty shekels from the chiefs of thousands and from the chiefs of hundreds.
(The men of the militia host had plundered, each man for himself.)
And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold from the chiefs of thousands and hundreds and brought it to the tent of appointment, a reminder for the sons of Israel before YHVH.
The abundance of cattle which the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad had came to be very substantial. Now they saw the land of Jazer and the land of Gilead, and behold, the place was a place for cattle.
So the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben came and spoke to Moses, to Eleazar the priest and to the princes of the congregation, saying:
Ataroth, Dibon, Jazer, Nimrah, Heshbon, Elealeh, Shebam, Nebo and Beon,
the land which YHVH smote before the congregation of Israel, it is cattle land, and your servants have cattle.
They also said: If we have found favor in your eyes, let this land be given to your servants for a holding; do not make us cross over the Jordan.
Then Moses said to the sons of Gad and to the sons of Reuben: Your brothers, shall they come to the war while you dwell here?
Why do you discourage the heart of the sons of Israel from crossing over to the land which YHVH has given to them?
Thus your fathers did when I sent them from Kadesh-barnea to see the land.
They went up to the watercourse of Eshcol and saw the land, yet they discouraged the heart of the sons of Israel so as not to enter the land which YHVH has given to them.
The anger of YHVH grew hot on that day, and He swore, saying:
Assuredly no one of the men coming up from Egypt, from twenty years old and upward shall see the ground about which I had sworn to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob! For they have not fully followed after Me
save Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite and Joshua son of Nun, for they fully followed after YHVH.
The anger of YHVH grew hot against Israel, and He caused them to rove about in the wilderness forty years until the whole generation doing evil in the eyes of YHVH came to end.
And behold, you have risen in your fathers' stead as a vast brood of sinful men to be swept up again on account of the heat of YHVH's anger toward Israel!
In case you turn back from following Him, then He will continue further to leave them in the wilderness, and you will ruin this whole people.
Now they came close to him and said: Stone dikes for flocks should we build here for our cattle and cities for our little ones.
Then we ourselves should be outfitted for the war, hurrying before the sons of Israel until whenever we should bring them to their place. Our little ones would dwell in fortress cities because of the presence of the dwellers of the land.
We shall not return to our houses until the sons of Israel entail each man his allotment,
for we shall not have an allotment with them across the Jordan and beyond since our allotment has come to us across the Jordan toward the sunrise.
Moses said to them: If you should do this thing, if you should be outfitted before YHVH for the war
so that every outfitted man you have will cross over the Jordan before YHVH until He has evicted His enemies from His presence,
and the land is subdued before YHVH, and if you return afterward, then you will be exempt from your obligation to YHVH and Israel, and this land will become yours for a holding before YHVH.
Yet if you shall not do so, behold, you will have sinned against YHVH; realize that your sin shall find you.
Build cities for yourselves, for your little ones, and stone dikes for your flocks, but what is coming forth from your mouth shall you do.
Then one spoke for the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben to Moses, saying: Your servants shall do just as my lord is giving instruction.
Our little ones, our wives, our cattle and all our beasts shall stay there in the cities of Gilead.
As for your servants, every man outfitted for the militia host, shall cross over before YHVH for the war, just as my lord is speaking.
As for them Moses instructed Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun and the patriarchal heads of the stocks of the sons of Israel.
And Moses said to them: If the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben shall cross over the Jordan with you, every man outfitted for the war before YHVH so that the land will be subdued before you, then give to them the land of Gilead for a holding.
Yet if those outfitted should not cross over with you, then they will be given a holding in your midst in the land of Canaan.
The sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben answered, saying: What YHVH has spoken to your servants so shall we do.
We, the outfitted, shall cross over before YHVH to the land of Canaan, yet for us the holding of our allotment is across the Jordan.
So Moses gave to them, to the sons of Gad and to the sons of Reuben and to the half tribe of Manasseh son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorite and the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, the land belonging to its cities within its territories and the cities of the land around.
The sons of Gad rebuilt Dibon, Ataroth, Aroer,
Atroth-shophan, Jazer, Jogbehah,
Beth-nimran and Beth-haran as fortress cities or stone dikes for flocks.
As for the sons of Reuben, they rebuilt Heshbon, Elealeh, Kiriathaim,
as well as Nebo and Baal-meon (turned around in name), and Sibmah; for they called the names of the cities which they rebuilt by their own names.
The sons of Machir son of Manasseh went to Gilead; they seized it and evicted the Amorite who was in it.
So Moses gave Gilead to Machir son of Manasseh, and he dwelt in it.
As for Jair son of Manasseh, he went and seized their settlements and called them Havvoth-jair.
As for Nobah, he went and seized Kenath and its outskirts. And he called it Nobah by his own name.
These are the journeys of the sons of Israel when they went forth from the land of Egypt by their militia hosts under the hand of Moses and Aaron.
Moses wrote down their exit-places of their journeys at the bidding of YHVH. And these are their decampments at their exit-places.
They journeyed from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the first month. On the morrow after the passover the sons of Israel went forth with a high hand before the eyes of all the Egyptians
while the Egyptians were entombing those whom YHVH had smitten among them, every firstborn, when YHVH had executed judgments on their God.
The sons of Israel journeyed from Rameses and encamped at Succoth.
They journeyed from Succoth and encamped in Etham, which was at the end of the wilderness.
They journeyed from Etham and turned back to Pi-hahiroth, which was adjoining Baal-zephon and encamped before Midgol.
They journeyed from Pi-hahiroth and crossed in the midst of the sea to the wilderness, went a way of three day into the wilderness of Etham and encamped at Marah.
They journeyed from Marah and came to Elim. There were twelve springs of water and seventy palm trees at Elim, and they encamped there.
They journeyed from Elim and encamped by the Sea of Weeds.
They journeyed from the Sea of Weeds and encamped in the wilderness of Sin.
They journeyed from the wilderness of Sin and encamped at Dophkah.
They journeyed from Dophkah and encamped at Alush.
They journeyed from Alush and encamped at Rephidim; there was no water there for the people to drink.
They journeyed from Rephidim and encamped in the wilderness of Sinai.
They journeyed from the wilderness of Sinai and encamped at Kibroth-hattaavah.
They journeyed from Kibroth-hattaavah and encamped at Hazeroth.
They journeyed from Hazeroth and encamped at Rithmah.
They journeyed from Rithmah and encamped at Rimmon-perez.
They journeyed from Rimmon-perez and encamped at Libnah.
They journeyed from Libnah and encamped at Rissah.
They journeyed from Rissah and encamped at Kehelathah.
They journeyed from Kehelathah and encamped at Mount Shepher.
They journeyed from Mount Shepher and encamped at Haradah.
They journeyed from Haradah and encamped at Makheloth.
They journeyed from Makheloth and encamped at Tahath.
They journeyed from Tahath and encamped at Tarah.
They journeyed from Tarah and encamped at Mithkah.
They journeyed from Mithkah and encamped at Hashmonah.
They journeyed from Hashmonah and encamped at Moseroth.
They journeyed from Moseroth and encamped at Bene-jaakan.
They journeyed from Bene-jaakan and encamped at Hor-haggidgad.
They journeyed from Hor-haggidgad and encamped at Jotbathah.
They journeyed from Jotbathah and encamped at Abronah.
They journeyed from Abronah and encamped at Ezion-geber.
They journeyed from Ezion-geber and encamped in the wilderness of Zin. They journeyed from the wilderness of Zin and encamped in the wilderness of Paran; it is toward Kadesh.
They journeyed from Kadesh and encamped at Mount Hor in the outmost part of the land of Edom.
Then Aaron the priest went up onto Mount Hor at the bidding of YHVH, and he died there in the fortieth year after going forth of the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt, in the fifth month, on day one of the month.
Aaron was a hundred twenty-three years old at his death on Mount Hor.
Then the Canaanite king of Arad, he who was dwelling in the Negev in the land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the sons of Israel.
They journeyed from Mount Hor and encamped at Zalmonah.
They journeyed from Zalmonah and encamped at Punon.
They journeyed from Punon and encamped in Oboth.
They journeyed from Oboth and encamped at Iyim of the Abarim at the boundary of Moab.
They journeyed from Iyim and encamped at Dibon-gad.
They journeyed from Dibon-gad and encamped at Almon-diblathaim.
They journeyed from Almon-diblathaim and encamped in the mountains of the Abarim before Nebo.
They journeyed from the mountains of Abarim and encamped in the plains of Moab along the Jordan across from Jericho.
They encamped along the Jordan from Beth-Jesimoth as far as Abel-Shittim in the plains of Moab.
YHVH spoke to Moses in the plains of Moab along the Jordan across from Jericho, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them: When you are crossing the Jordan into the land of Canaan
then you will evict all the dwellers of the land from before you and destroy all their pictures; and all their molten images shall you destroy, and all their fane heights shall you exterminate.
You will prepare the land for tenancy and dwell in it, for to you I give the land to tenant it.
And you will entail the land by lot, by your families. For the numerous one you shall increase his allotment, and for the little one you shall decrease his allotment. Whenever the lot comes forth for him it shall be his. By the stocks of your fathers shall you entail among yourselves.
Yet if you should not evict the dwellers of the land from your presence, then those whom you are leaving of them will become barbs in your eyes and pricks in your sides, and they will distress you in the land in which you are dwelling.
And it will come to be: just as I meant to do to them, I shall do to you.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Instruct the sons of Israel and say to them: When you are coming into the land of Canaan, this is the land which shall fall to you in allotment, the land of Canaan to its boundaries.
Your southward edge will be from the wilderness of Zin along the sides of Edom, and your southward boundary will be from the end of the Salt Sea eastward;
your boundary will turn around from the Negev to the ascent of Akrabbim, and it will pass toward Zin (and its border-area will be from the Negev to Kadesh-barnea), and it will go forth to Hazar-addar and pass toward Azmon.
The boundary will turn around from Azmon toward the watercourse of Egypt, and its border-area will be toward the sea.
As for the western boundary, you will come to have the Great Sea and its coastal territory. This shall be your western boundary.
And this shall be your northern boundary: from the Great Sea you shall mark out your line to Mount Hor;
from Mount Hor you shall mark it out to Lebo-hamath, and the border-area of the territory will be at Zedad;
then the boundary will go forth toward Ziphron, and its border-area will be at Hazar-enan. This shall be your northern boundary.
You will mark out for yourselves as an eastward boundary a line from Hazar-enan toward Shepham.
The boundary will go down from Shepham toward Riblah on the east side of Ain; the boundary will also go down and abut on the shoulder of the lake of Chinnereth, eastward.
Then the boundary will go down along the Jordan, and its border-area will be at the Salt Sea. This shall be your land as to its boundaries round about.
Moses instructed the sons of Israel, saying: This is the land which you shall entail by lot and which YHVH has instructed to give to nine of the stocks and the half stock of Manasseh.
For they have taken, the stock of the sons of the Reubenite by their fathers' house and the stock of the sons of the Gadite by their fathers' house and the half stock of Manasseh, they have taken their allotment.
The two stocks and the half stock have taken their allotment across the Jordan of Jericho, eastward toward sunrise.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
These are the names of the men who shall allot the land to you: Eleazar the priest and Joshua son of Nun,
and one prince, one prince from each stock, shall you take to allot the land.
And these are the names of the men: for the stock of Judah, Caleb son of Jephunneh;
for the stock of the sons of Simeon, Samuel son of Ammihud;
for the stock of Benjamin, Elidad son of Chislon;
for the stock of the sons of Dan, prince Bukki son of Jogli;
for the sons of Joseph: for the stock of the sons of Manasseh, prince Hanniel son of Ephod,
for the stock of the sons of Ephraim, prince Kemuel son of Shiphtan;
for the stock of the sons of Zebulun, prince Elizaphan son of Parnach;
for the stock of the sons of Issachar, prince Paltiel son of Azzan;
for the stock of the sons of Asher, prince Ahihud son of Shelomi;
and for the stock of the sons of Naphtali, prince Pedahel son of Ammihud.
These are those whom YHVH had instructed to make the allotment to the sons of Israel in the land of Canaan.
YHVH spoke to Moses in the plains of Moab along the Jordan across from Jericho, saying:
Instruct the sons of Israel so that they give to the Levites, from the allotment of their holding, cities to dwell in; and by the cities, common pasture land around them shall you give to the Levites.
The cities will be theirs to dwell in, and their common lands shall be for their domestic beasts, for their goods and for all their animals.
The common lands of the cities which you shall give to the Levites will extend from the sidewall of the city outward a thousand cubits round about.
You will measure off outside the city on the eastward edge two thousand cubits, on the southward edge two thousand cubits, on the western edge two thousand cubits and on the northern edge two thousand cubits with the city in the middle. This shall be their common lands for the cities.
And of the cities which you shall give to the Levites six will be asylum cities which you shall give for the manslayer to flee there. And along with them you shall give forty-two other cities.
All the cities which you shall give to the Levites will be forty-eight cities, these and their common pasture lands.
And the cities which you shall give will be from the holding of the sons of Israel: from the numerous one you shall increase and from the little one you shall decrease; each tribe according to the bidding of its allotment which they are allotting shall give from its cities to the Levites.
YHVH spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak to the sons of Israel and say to them: When you are crossing over the Jordan to the land of Canaan
then you will proclaim your cities which shall be cities of asylum for you; there the manslayer will flee, whoever is smiting a soul to death inadvertently.
They will become for you the cities of asylum from the redeemer so that the manslayer should not die until he stands before the congregation for judgment.
Of the cities which you shall give six shall become your asylum cities.
Three of the cities shall you give across the Jordan, and three of the cities shall you give in the land of Canaan; cities of asylum shall they be.
For the sons of Israel, for the sojourner and for the guest in their midst, these six cities shall be for an asylum to flee there for everyone smiting a soul to death inadvertently.
Yet if he smites him with an iron instrument and he dies, he is a murderer. The murderer shall be put to death, yea death.
And if he smites him with a stone in his hand by which one may die, and he dies, he is a murderer. The murderer shall be put to death, yea death.
Or if he smites him with a wooden instrument in his hand by which one may die, and he dies, he is a murderer. The murderer shall be put to death, yea death.
The redeemer of blood, he shall put the murderer to death; when he comes upon him he shall put him to death.
And if he thrusts him in hatred or flings anything at him with malicious intent and he dies,
or he smites him in enmity with his hand and he dies, the smiter shall be put to death, yea death; he is a murderer. The redeemer of blood shall put the murderer to death when he comes upon him.
Yet if in an instant, with no enmity, he thrusts him or flings any article at him with no malicious intent,
or, when not seeing him, he causes any stone by which one may die to fall on him and he dies, yet he was not his enemy and was not seeking his evil,
then the congregation will judge between the smiter and the redeemer of blood by these judgments;
and the congregation will rescue the manslayer from the hand of the redeemer of blood, and the congregation will restore him to his city of asylum where he had fled. He will dwell in it until the death of the great priest, whom one anointed with the holy oil.
Yet if the manslayer goes forth, yea forth beyond the boundary of his city of asylum where he had fled
and the redeemer of blood finds him outside the boundary of his city of asylum, and the redeemer of blood murders the manslayer, there is no bloodguilt on him,
for he should dwell in his city of asylum until the death of the great priest. Yet after the death of the great priest the manslayer may return to the land of his holding.
These will be for you a statute of judgment throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
Everyone smiting a soul to death, at the mouth of witnesses one shall murder the murderer. Yet a single witness shall not assert guilt against a soul to cause him to die.
Nor shall you take a sheltering ransom for the soul of the murderer, who stands condemned to die; for he shall be put to death, yea death.
And no sheltering ransom shall you take for one who had fled to his city of asylum only to return to dwell in the land before the death of the great priest.
You shall not pollute the land in which you are dwelling; for it is the blood that pollutes the land. As for the land, no shelter may be made for the blood which was shed on it save by the blood of him who shed it.
You shall not defile the land in which you are dwelling, in whose midst I am tabernacling, for I, YHVH, am tabernacling in the midst of the sons of Israel.
The patriarchal heads of the family of the sons of Gilead son of Machir son of Manasseh, from the families of the sons of Joseph came near and spoke before Moses and before the princes, the patriarchal heads of the sons of Israel.
They said: YHVH has instructed my lord to give the land in allotments by lot to the sons of Israel. And my lord was instructed by YHVH to give the allotment of Zelophehad, our brother, to his daughters.
When they become wives for some of the sons of the other tribes of the sons of Israel, then their allotment will be subtracted from the allotment of our fathers, and it will be added onto the allotment of the stock to which they should belong, and from the lot of our allotment it shall be subtracted.
When the jubilee comes for the sons of Israel then their allotment would be added onto the allotment of the stock to which they should belong; and from the allotment of our fathers' stock their allotment might be subtracted.
So Moses instructed the sons of Israel at the bidding of YHVH, saying: Properly the stock of the sons of Joseph is speaking.
This is the word which YHVH has instructed as to the daughters of Zelophehad, saying, To anyone good in their eyes they may become wives; only into the family of their father's stock shall they become wives.
The allotment of the sons of Israel shall not go around from stock to stock, for the sons of Israel, each one, shall cling to the allotment of his fathers' stock.
And every daughter tenanting an allotment from the stocks of the sons of Israel, to someone from the family of her father's stock should she become the wife so that the sons of Israel may tenant, each one, the allotment of his fathers.
The allotment shall not go around from one stock to another stock, for the stocks of the sons of Israel each one shall cling to his allotment.
Just as YHVH had instructed Moses, so did the daughters of Zelophehad.
Mahlah, Tirzah, Hoglah, Milcah and Noah, daughters of Zelophehad, became wives of their uncles' sons.
To those from the families of the sons of Manasseh son of Joseph they became wives; and their allotment came to be with the stock of their father's family.
These are the instructions and judgments which YHVH had instructed by means of Moses to the sons of Israel in the plains of Moab, along the Jordan across from Jericho.
These are the words that Moses spoke to all Israel in Transjordan in the wilderness, in the Aravah opposite Suph between Paran and Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth and Di-zahab.
(It is eleven days' journey from Horeb by the Mount Seir road unto Kadesh-barnea.)
It came to be in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on day one of the month, that Moses spoke to all the sons of Israel according to all that YHVH had instructed him concerning them,
after his smiting Sihon king of the Amorite (who was dwelling in Heshbon) and Og king of Bashan (who was dwelling in Astaroth) at Edrei.
In Transjordan in the country of Moab, Moses was disposed to make this law plain by saying:
YHVH our God, He spoke to us at Horeb saying, Many days have you dwelt at this mountain.
Turn around and take your journey and enter the hill-country of the Amorite; go to all his neighbors in the Aravah, in the hill-country, in the low foothills, in the Negev and on the sea shore, the country of the Canaanite and the Lebanon as far as the Great Stream, the stream Euphrates.
See! I have set the land before you. Enter and tenant the land about which YHVH had sworn to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob, to give to them and to their seed after them.
I spoke to you at that time saying: I am not able to bear you alone.
YHVH your God, He has made you multiply, and behold, you are today like the stars of the heavens for multitude.
May YHVH God of your fathers add to you a thousand times as many as you are, and may He bless you just as He promised to you.
How shall I alone bear the encumbrance of you, and the load of you and your contention?
Grant yourselves men wise and understanding, and known to your tribes, that I may place them as your heads.
And you answered me and said: The word that you speak for us to do is good.
So I took the heads of your tribes, men wise and known, and I placed them as heads over you, chiefs of thousands, chiefs of hundreds, chiefs of fifties, chiefs of tens and as superintendents for your tribes.
And I instructed your judges at that time, saying: You are to hear the disputes between your brothers, and you will judge justly between a man and his brother or his sojourner.
You shall not recognize faces with partiality in judgment. You shall hear the small as the great. You shall not shrink away from any man's face, because the judgment, it is God's. And the matter which is too hard for you, you shall bring near to me that I may hear it.
Thus I instructed you at that time in all the things which you should do.
We journeyed from Horeb and went through all that vast and fear-inspiring wilderness which you saw by way of the Amorite hill-country, just as YHVH our God had instructed us, and we came as far as Kadesh-barnea.
Then I said to you: You have come as far as the Amorite hill-country that YHVH our God is giving to us.
See! YHVH your God has set the land before you. Ascend! Tenant it just as YHVH God of your fathers promised to you. Do not fear, and do not be dismayed.
Then you came near to me, all of you, and said: Let us send men before us that they may reconnoiter in the land for us and bring us back word about the way by which we should ascend, and about the cities to which we shall come.
Now the word was good in my eyes, so I took twelve men from you, one man for each tribe.
They turned around, ascended toward the hill-country and came back to the watercourse of Eshcol and spied it out.
Then they took in their hand some of the fruit of the land and brought it down to us; they brought us back word and said: The land that YHVH our God is giving to us is good.
Yet you would not ascend and you defied the bidding of YHVH your God.
You murmured in your tents and said: In YHVH's hatred of us He brought us forth from the country of Egypt to give us into the hand of the Amorite to exterminate us.
Whither are we ascending? Our brothers, they melt our heart by saying: The people are greater and taller than we are; the cities are great and defended to the heavens; and moreover, we saw the sons of the Anakim there.
Then I said to you: You should not be terrified, and you should not fear them.
YHVH your God Who is going before you, He Himself shall fight for you according to all that He did for you in Egypt before your eyes,
and in the wilderness where you saw how YHVH your God carried you, just as a man carries his son, in all the way you went until you came to this place.
Even in this matter you were not believing in YHVH your God,
Who was going before you in the way to explore for you a place for you to encamp, in fire by night, to show you the way by which you should go, and in a cloud by day.
When YHVH heard the sound of your words, He was wrathful; and He swore saying:
Assuredly no one among these mortals, this evil generation, shall see the good land about which I had sworn to give to your fathers,
except Caleb son of Jephunneh; he shall see it. To him shall I give the area on which he has trodden, and to his sons, because he has fully followed after YHVH.
Moreover YHVH showed Himself angered with me owing to you, saying: Not even you shall enter there.
Joshua son of Nun, who is standing before you, he shall enter there. Encourage him, for he shall allot it to Israel.
And your little ones of whom you said, They shall come to be for plunder, and your sons who today do not know good or evil, they shall enter there; to them shall I give it, and they shall tenant it.
Yet you, turn yourselves around and journey toward the wilderness by the Sea of Weeds road.
Then you answered and said to me: We have sinned against YHVH our God. We shall ascend, and we will fight according to all that YHVH our God has instructed us. So each man of you girded on his implements of war, and you thought it easy to ascend to the hill-country.
Yet YHVH said to me: Say to them, You shall not ascend, and you shall not fight (since I am not among you), that you may not be stricken before your enemies.
So I spoke to you, yet you did not hearken; you defied the bidding of YHVH and showed arrogance, and you ascended to the hill-country.
Yet the Amorite who was dwelling in that hill-country came forth to meet you; they pursued you just as bees do, and they pounded you in Seir as far as Hormah.
Then you returned and lamented before YHVH. Yet YHVH did not hearken to your voice nor give ear to you.
So you dwelt at Kadesh many days, according to the days which you dwelt.
Then we turned around and journeyed to the wilderness by the Sea of Weeds road, just as YHVH had spoken to me; and we were around the hill-country of Seir many days.
Then YHVH spoke to me saying:
Long enough you have been around this hill-country. Turn yourselves around northward
and instruct the people saying, You shall pass through the territory of your brothers, the sons of Esau, who are dwelling in Seir. They shall fear you, yet you must be very much on guard.
Do not stir yourselves up against them, for I shall not give to you any of their country, not even a tread of a foot's sole for I have given the hill-country of Seir for a tenancy to Esau.
You shall purchase food from them with silver, that you may eat. Even for water you shall bargain from them with silver, that you may drink.
For YHVH your God, He has blessed you in every work of your hand. He knows of your going in this great wilderness. These forty years YHVH your God has been with you. You have lacked nothing.
So we passed on away from our brothers, the sons of Esau who are dwelling in Seir, away from the Aravah road, away from Elath and away from Ezion-geber, and turned around and passed on by the Moab wilderness road.
Then YHVH said to me: Do not distress Moab and do not stir yourself up against them in battle, for I shall not give to you any of his country as a tenancy, for I gave Ar to the sons of Lot as a tenancy.
(The Emim dwelt in it beforetime, a people great and numerous, and as tall as the Anakim.
Like the Anakim, they too were accounted as Rephaim, yet the Moabites called them Emim.
And the Horites dwelt beforetime in Seir, yet the sons of Esau tenanted in their place and exterminated them before their face that they might dwell in their stead, just as Israel did to the land of its tenancy that YHVH had given to them.)
Now arise, journey, and you cross over the watercourse of Zered. So we crossed over the watercourse of Zered.
The days that we went from Kadesh-barnea until we crossed over the watercourse of Zered were thirty-eight years, until the entire generation of the men of war had come to end from among the camp, just as YHVH had sworn concerning them.
And indeed, the hand of YHVH came to be against them to discomfit them from among the camp, until they had come to end.
It came to be just as all the men of war had come to end, dying from among the people,
that YHVH spoke to me, saying:
Today you are passing through the territory of Moab at Ar;
then you will come near to the forefront of the sons of Ammon. Do not distress them and do not stir yourself up against them, for I shall not give any of the country of the sons of Ammon to you as a tenancy, since I gave it to the sons of Lot as a tenancy.
(It too was accounted as a country of Rephaim. Rephaim dwelt in it beforetime, yet the Ammonites called them Zamzummim,
a people great and numerous, and as tall as the Anakim. Yet YHVH exterminated them before their face that they might tenant in their place and dwell in their stead,
just as He did for the sons of Esau who were dwelling in Seir, when He exterminated the Horite before their face, and they tenanted in their place and dwelt in their stead until this day.
As for the Avvim who were dwelling in hamlets as far as Gaza, the Caphtorim, who were coming forth from Caphtor, they exterminated them and dwelt in their stead.)
Arise, journey, and cross over the watercourse of Arnon. See! I will give into your hand Sihon king of Heshbon, the Amorite, and his country. Start out to tenant it, and struggle with him in battle.
This day I shall start to put the awe of you and the fear of you on the face of all peoples beneath the entire heavens; whenever they should hear a report of you, they will be disturbed and in travail before your face.
Then I sent messengers from the wilderness of Kedemoth to Sihon king of Heshbon, with words of peace, saying:
Let me pass through your country along the main road. Only along the main road shall I go. I shall not withdraw to the right or to the left.
You may retail to me food for silver that I may eat. And you may give me water for silver that I may drink. But let me pass through on my feet
(just as the sons of Esau who are dwelling in Seir and the Moabites who are dwelling in Ar did for me), until I shall cross over the Jordan to the land that YHVH our God is giving to us.
Yet Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass through it, for YHVH your God made his spirit obstinate and made his heart resolute, that He might give him into your hand (as is known this day).
Then YHVH said to me: See! I have started to deliver up before you Sihon king of Heshbon, the Amorite, and his country. Start out to tenant, yea tenant his country.
When Sihon came forth to meet us, he and all his people, for battle at Jahaz,
YHVH our God delivered him up before us, and we smote him, his sons and all his people.
We seized all his cities at that time, and we doomed every city adult males, women and little ones we let not one survivor remain.
But the domestic beasts we plundered for ourselves, and the loot of the cities that we had seized.
From Aroer which is on the ridge of the watercourse of Arnon, and the city which is in the watercourse valley, even as far as Gilead, there was no town which was impregnable to us. YHVH our God gave the whole into our hands.
But to the country of the sons of Ammon, all along the side of the watercourse of Jabbok and the cities of the hill-country you did not come near, thus doing all of that which YHVH our God had given instructions.
Then we turned around and ascended the Bashan road. And Og king of Bashan came forth to meet us, he and all his people, for battle at Edrei.
But YHVH said to me: Do not fear him, for into your hand I will give him, all his people and his country, and you will do to him just as you did to Sihon king of the Amorite who was dwelling in Heshbon.
So YHVH our God also gave into our hand Og king of Bashan and all his people, and we smote him until no survivor at all was left remaining to him.
Then we seized all his cities at that time. There was not a town which we did not take from them, sixty cities, the whole district of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
All these cities were defended by lofty walls, doors and bars, aside from the unwalled villages which were exceedingly numerous.
And we doomed them just as we did to Sihon king of Heshbon, dooming every city adult males, women and little ones.
All the domestic beasts and the loot of the cities we plundered for ourselves.
At that time we took the area from the hand of the two kings of the Amorite who were in Transjordan, from the watercourse of Arnon as far as Mount Hermon
(the Sidonians call Hermon Sirion, and the Amorite call it Shenir),
all the cities of the tableland and all Gilead and all Bashan as far as Salchah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
(For only Og king of Bashan had remained of the rest of the Rephaim. Behold, his divan is a burial divan of wrought iron. Is it not in Rabbah of the sons of Ammon? Nine cubits is its length and four cubits its width, in the cubit measure of a man.)
From this land which we took over at that time, the part from Aroer which is on the ridge of the watercourse of Arnon with half the hill-country of Gilead and its cities I gave to the Reubenite and to the Gadite.
The rest of Gilead and all of Bashan, the kingdom of Og, I gave to the half tribe of Manasseh, including the whole district of Argob. All of that Bashan is called the country of the Rephaim.
Jair son of Manasseh, he took the whole district of Argob as far as the boundary of the Geshurite and the Maachathite and called them (that is, Bashan) by his own name, Havvoth-jair, until this day.
And to Machir I gave Gilead.
To the Reubenite and to the Gadite I gave their half of Gilead: as far as the watercourse of Arnon (the middle of the watercourse as boundary), as far as the Jabbok watercourse, the boundary of the sons of Ammon.
In the west the Aravah with the Jordan was the boundary from Chinnereth as far as the sea of the Aravah, the Salt Sea, below the slopes of the Pisgah ridge toward sunrise.
I instructed you at that time, saying: YHVH your God, He has given to you this land to tenant it. You shall cross over outfitted for war before your brothers, the sons of Israel, all you sons of valor.
But your wives and your little ones and your cattle (I know that you have much cattle), they may dwell in your cities which I gave to you
until YHVH shall give rest to your brothers, as He gave to you, and they too will tenant the land that YHVH your God is giving to them across the Jordan. Then you may return, each to his tenancy, which I gave to you.
I instructed Joshua at that time, saying: Your eyes were the ones seeing all that YHVH your God has done to these two kings. Thus shall YHVH do to all the kingdoms where you are passing.
You shall not fear them, for YHVH your God, He is the One fighting for you.
I supplicated to YHVH at that time, saying:
My Lord YHVH, You Yourself have started to show Your servant Your greatness and Your steadfast hand, and Your outstretched arm. For what el is in the heavens or on the earth who could do according to Your deeds and according to Your mastery?
Let me cross over, I pray so I may see the good land that is across the Jordan, this good hill-country and the Lebanon.
Yet YHVH was enraged with me on account of you and did not hearken to me. YHVH said to me: Let it be enough for you! Do not continue to speak to Me further on this matter.
Ascend to the summit of the Pisgah ridge, and lift up your eyes westward and northward and southward and eastward and see with your eyes, for you shall not cross over this Jordan.
Yet instruct Joshua and encourage him and make him resolute, for he shall cross over before this people, and he shall allot to them the land that you shall see.
So we dwelt in the ravine opposite Beth-peor.
Now, Israel, hearken to the statutes and to the judgments that I am teaching you today, to obey them, that you may live and may enter and tenant the land that YHVH God of your fathers is giving to you.
You shall neither add to the word that I am enjoining on you, nor shall you subtract from it, but observe the instructions of YHVH your God that I am enjoining on you.
Your eyes were the ones seeing all that YHVH did with regard to Baal-peor, for every man who went after Baal-peor, YHVH your God exterminated from among you.
Yet you who were clinging to YHVH your God, all of you are alive today.
See! I have taught you statutes and judgments just as YHVH my God had instructed me, for you to do thus within the land where you are entering to tenant it.
And you must observe and obey them, for that is your wisdom and your understanding in the eyes of all the peoples who shall hear of all these statutes and will say: Surely this great nation is a people wise and understanding.
For what great nation is there which has God so near to it as YHVH our God is in all that we call to Him?
And what great nation is there which has statutes and judgments so righteous as all this law that I am putting before you today?
But guard yourself and keep your soul especially vigilant, lest you should forget the things which your eyes have seen, and lest they should withdraw from your heart, all the days of your lives. You make them known to your sons and to your sons' sons, lest you forget
the day that you stood before YHVH your God at Horeb, when YHVH said to me: Assemble the people to Me that I may let them hear My words, so that they may learn to fear Me all the days that they are alive on the ground and may teach their sons.
Then you approached and stood below the mountain, when the mountain was consuming with fire unto the heart of the heavens, with darkness, cloud and murkiness,
and YHVH spoke to you from the midst of the fire; you were hearing the sound of words, yet you were not seeing a physical representation, nothing except a voice.
He told you His covenant which He instructed you to keep, the ten words. Then He wrote them on two tablets of stone.
And YHVH instructed me at that time to teach you statutes and judgments, for you to obey them in the land where you are crossing over to tenant it.
You must be very much on guard against your soulish desires (since you saw no physical representation at all on the day YHVH spoke to you at Horeb from the midst of the fire)
lest you should bring ruin on yourselves and make for yourselves a carving, a physical representation of any figure, a model of male or female,
a model of any beast which is on the earth, a model of any winged bird which flies in the heavens,
a model of any animal moving on the ground, a model of any fish which is in the waters below the earth.
Guard yourselves lest you should lift up your eyes toward the heavens, and you see the sun and the moon and the stars, all the host of the heavens, and be induced to bow yourself down to them and serve them, which YHVH your God has apportioned to all other peoples beneath the entire heavens.
As for you, YHVH took you, and He brought you forth from the iron crucible, from Egypt, to become His as a people of allotment, as on this day.
Yet YHVH showed Himself angered with me on account of your words. He swore that I would fail to cross over the Jordan and that I would fail to come to the good land that YHVH your God is giving to you as an allotment,
for I am dying in this land. I am not crossing over the Jordan, but you are crossing over and will tenant that good land.
Guard yourselves lest you forget the covenant of YHVH your God that He contracted with you, and so you make for yourselves a carving, a physical representation of anything, against which YHVH your God had instructed you;
for YHVH your God, He is a devouring fire, a jealous El.
When you beget sons and sons of sons, and find repose in the land and then become corrupt and make a carving, a physical representation of anything, and do evil in the eyes of YHVH your God so as to provoke Him to vexation
I testify against you today by the heavens and the earth, that you shall perish, yea perish quickly off the land where you are crossing over the Jordan to tenant it. You shall not prolong your days on it, for you shall be exterminated, yea exterminated.
YHVH will cause you to scatter among the peoples, and you will remain adult males of a small number among the nations where YHVH shall lead you.
And there you will serve other God, the work of human hands, of wood and stone which are neither seeing nor hearing, neither eating nor smelling.
Yet from there you will seek YHVH your God and find Him when you inquire for Him with all your heart and with all your soul.
In your distress, when all these things find you in the latter days, then you will return to YHVH your God and hearken to His voice.
For YHVH your God is a compassionate El. He shall neither neglect you nor bring ruin on you, nor shall He forget the covenant of your fathers about which He had sworn to them.
For ask now about the former days which came before you, from the day that God created humanity on the earth, and from one end of the heavens unto the other end of the heavens: Has there occurred anything like this great thing, or has anything been heard like it?
Has a people ever heard the voice of the living God speaking from the midst of the fire just as you heard it, and lived?
Or has an God ever tried to come and take for himself a nation from among another nation by trials, by signs and by miracles, by war, by a steadfast hand and by an outstretched arm and by great fear-inspiring deeds, such as all that YHVH your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes?
You were shown this to know that YHVH, He is the only God. There is no one else aside from Him.
From the heavens He let you hear His voice, to discipline you, and on the earth He showed you His great fire, and you heard His words from the midst of the fire.
For inasmuch as He loved your fathers and chose their seed after them and brought you forth from Egypt into His presence by His great vigor,
to evict greater and more substantial nations than you from your presence, to bring you in and give to you their country as an allotment, as it is this day,
so you know today, and you recall it to your heart that YHVH, He is the only God in the heavens above and on the earth beneath; there is no one else.
Hence you will observe His statutes and His instructions which I am enjoining on you today, that it may be well with you and your sons after you, and that you may prolong your days on the ground that YHVH your God is giving to you, all the days.
Then Moses separated three cities in Transjordan toward the sunrise,
for the fleeing there of the manslayer who slays his associate without knowledge, when he was not hating him heretofore. Then he will flee to one of these cities that he may live:
Bezer in the wilderness in the tableland country for the Reubenite, and Ramoth in Gilead for the Gadite, and Golan in Bashan for the Manassite.
This is the law that Moses placed before the sons of Israel.
These are the testimonies and the statutes and the judgments that Moses pronounced to the sons of Israel when they had come forth from Egypt,
in Transjordan in the ravine opposite Beth-peor, in the country of Sihon king of the Amorite, who was dwelling in Heshbon, whom Moses and the sons of Israel smote when they had come forth from Egypt.
Then they tenanted his country and the country of Og king of Bashan, two kings of the Amorite who were in Transjordan toward the sunrise,
from Aroer, which is on the ridge above the watercourse of Arnon and as far as Mount Sirion (that is Hermon),
and all the Transjordan Aravah toward the sunrise and as far as the sea of the Aravah below the slopes of the Pisgah ridge.
Moses called to all Israel and said to them: Hear, Israel, the statutes and the judgments that I am speaking in your ears today, that you learn them and observe to obey them.
YHVH our God, He contracted a covenant with us at Horeb.
Not with our fathers did YHVH contract this covenant, but with us, us, these here today, all of us who are alive.
Face to face YHVH spoke with you at the mount from the midst of the fire
(I was standing between YHVH and you at that time, to tell you the word of YHVH, for you were fearful because of the presence of the fire and did not ascend onto the mountain), saying:
I, YHVH, am your God Who brought you forth from the country of Egypt, from the house of servants.
You shall not come to have other God in preference to Me.
You shall not make for yourself a carving nor any physical representation of that in the heavens above or that on the earth beneath or that in the waters beneath the earth.
You shall not bow yourself down to them, nor be made to serve them, for I, YHVH your God, am a jealous El, visiting the depravity of the fathers on the sons, on the third and on the fourth generation, to those hating Me,
yet doing kindness to thousands, to those loving Me and observing My instructions.
You shall not take up the name of YHVH your God for futility, for YHVH shall not hold innocent him who takes up His name for futility.
You are to observe the sabbath day to hallow it, just as YHVH your God had instructed you.
Six days shall you serve and do all your work,
yet the seventh day is a sabbath to YHVH your God. You shall not do any work of slavery on it; you, your son or your daughter, your servant or your maidservant, your bull, your donkey or any domestic beast of yours, or your sojourner who is within your gates, that your servant and your maidservant may rest as you do.
Remember that you had become a servant in the country of Egypt, and YHVH your God brought you forth from there with a steadfast hand and with an outstretched arm. Therefore YHVH your God instructed you to observe the sabbath day.
Glorify your father and your mother, just as YHVH your God had instructed you, that your days may be prolonged and that it may be well with you on the ground which YHVH your God is giving to you.
You shall not murder.
You shall not commit sexual perversion.
You shall not steal.
You shall not answer against your associate with false testimony.
You shall not covet the wife of your associate. You shall not lust after the house of your associate, his field, his servant or his maidservant, his bull, his donkey or anything which is your associate's.
These were the words YHVH spoke to your whole assembly at the mountain, in a loud voice from the midst of the fire, the darkness, the cloud and the murkiness; and He added no more. He wrote them on two tablets of stone and gave them to me.
Then it came to be, as you heard the voice from the midst of the fire and the darkness, when the mountain was consuming with fire, that you came near to me, all the heads of your tribes and your elders,
and you said: Behold, YHVH our God has shown us His glory and His greatness, and we heard His voice from the midst of the fire. This day we have seen that God speaks with the human and he still lives.
Yet now, why should we die? For this great fire shall devour us. If we are continuing to hear the voice of YHVH our God any further, than we will die.
For who is there of all flesh that has heard the voice of the living God speaking from the midst of the fire as we have, and he still lives?
As for you, go near and hear all that YHVH our God says; then you shall speak to us all that YHVH our God shall speak to you, and we will hearken and obey.
YHVH heard the sound of your words when you spoke to me, and YHVH said to me: I have heard the sound of the words of this people that they have spoken to you. They have done well in all they have spoken.
O that their heart might become this way with them: to fear Me and to observe all My instructions all the days, that it might be well with them and with their sons for the eon.
Go, say to them: You return to your tents!
As for you, stay here with Me, and let Me speak to you about all the instruction and the statutes and the judgments that you shall teach them, so that they may obey them in the land that I am giving to them to tenant it.
You will observe to do just as YHVH your God had enjoined on you. You shall not withdraw to the right or to the left.
In all the ways which YHVH your God had enjoined on you, you should walk that you may live, and it may be well with you, and you may prolong your days in the land that you shall tenant.
Now this is the instruction, the statutes and the judgments that YHVH your God had enjoined on me to teach you, to keep in the land where you are crossing over to tenant it,
that you may fear YHVH your God, so as to observe all His statutes and His instructions which I am enjoining on you today, you and your son and your son's son, all the days of your life, and that your days may be prolonged.
Hear then, Israel, and observe to obey it, that it may be well with you, and that you may multiply exceedingly, just as YHVH God of your fathers promised to give to you a land gushing with milk and honey.
Hear, Israel! YHVH is our God; YHVH the only One.
So you will love YHVH your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your intensity.
These words which I am instructing you today will come to be in your heart.
Repeat them to your sons, and speak of them when you sit in your house, when you walk on the road, when you lie down and when you arise.
Tie them for a sign on your hand, and they will come to be for the brow bands between your eyes;
Write them on the jambs of your house and on your gates.
When it comes to be that YHVH your God brings you into the land about which He had sworn to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob, to give to you great and good cities which you did not build,
and houses full of all good things which you did not fill, and hewn cisterns which you did not hew, vineyards and olive trees which you did not plant, so that you will eat and be satisfied,
then guard yourself, lest you should forget YHVH your God Who brought you forth from the country of Egypt, from the house of servants.
YHVH your God shall you fear, and Him only shall you serve, and to Him shall you cling, and by His name shall you swear.
You shall not go after other God of God of the peoples who are around you
(for a jealous El is YHVH your God among you); otherwise the anger of YHVH your God shall grow hot against you, and He will exterminate you off the surface of the ground.
You shall not probe YHVH your God as you probed at Massah.
You shall observe, yea observe the instructions of YHVH your God and His testimonies and His statutes, which He had enjoined on you.
Do the upright and the good in the eyes of YHVH your God that it may be well with you and that you may enter and tenant the good land about which YHVH had sworn to your fathers,
to thrust out all your enemies from your presence, just as YHVH had promised.
When it comes to be that your son should ask you tomorrow, saying: What are the testimonies and the statutes and the judgments that YHVH our God had enjoined on you?
then you will say to your son: We were servants to Pharaoh in Egypt, yet YHVH brought us forth from Egypt with a steadfast hand.
And YHVH gave signs and miracles, great and bad, against Egypt, against Pharaoh and against all his household before our eyes.
Then He brought us forth from there, that He might bring us in and give to us the land about which YHVH had sworn to our fathers.
Then YHVH instructed us to obey all these statutes, to fear YHVH our God for our good all the days so as to keep us alive, as it is this day.
So it shall come to be righteousness for us when we observe to do all this instruction before YHVH our God, just as He had enjoined on us.
When YHVH your God brings you into the land where you are about to enter in order to tenant it, and He eases many nations out before your face, the Hittite, the Girgashite, the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite and the Jebusite, seven nations more numerous and substantial than you,
when YHVH your God gives them up before you, and you smite them, then you shall doom, yea doom them. You shall neither contract a covenant with them nor be gracious to them,
nor shall you intermarry with them. You shall not give your daughter to his son, and you shall not take his daughter for your son.
For it might take away your son from following after Me, and they might serve other God, and the anger of YHVH would grow hot against you, and He would exterminate you quickly.
But rather, thus shall you do to them: you shall tear down their altars, break their monuments, hack down their Asherah poles, and you shall burn their carvings with fire.
For you are a people holy to YHVH your God; YHVH your God has chosen you to become His, a special people from all the peoples who are on the surface of the ground.
It was not because your multitude was more than all the other peoples that YHVH was attached to you and chose you, for you were the fewest of all the peoples.
But it was because of the love of YHVH for you and because of His keeping the oath that He had sworn to your fathers that YHVH brought you forth with a steadfast hand and ransomed you from the house of servants, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.
Then know that YHVH your God, He is the One God, the El, Who is faithful, keeping the covenant and the kindness to those loving Him and to those observing His instructions for a thousand generations,
yet repaying the one hating Him right to His face, so as to destroy him. He shall not delay toward one hating Him right to His face; He shall repay him.
Hence observe the instruction and the statutes and the judgments which I am enjoining on you today, to keep them.
It will come to be, insomuch as you shall hearken to these judgments, and you observe and do them, that YHVH your God will keep with you the covenant and the kindness about which He had sworn to your fathers;
He will love you and bless you; He will multiply you and bless the fruit of your belly and the fruit of your ground, your grain, your grape juice, and your clarified oil, the calving of your domestic animals and the lambing of your flock, on the ground about which YHVH had sworn to your fathers to give to you.
Blessed shall you come to be above all the peoples. There shall come to be no sterile man or barren woman among you, nor among your beasts.
YHVH will take away from you every illness; and all the bad diseases of Egypt about which you know, He shall not place them among you, but He will give them to all those hating you.
Now you will devour all the peoples whom YHVH your God is delivering to you. Your eye shall not commiserate over them, and you shall not serve their God, for that is a trap to you.
Though you may say in your heart: These nations are more numerous than I; how shall I be able to evict them?
You shall not fear them. You shall remember, yea remember what YHVH your God did to Pharaoh and to all of Egypt,
the great probings which your eyes have seen, the signs and the miracles, the steadfast hand and the outstretched arm with which YHVH your God brought you forth. So shall YHVH your God do to all the peoples of whom you are fearful because of their presence.
Moreover, YHVH your God shall send the hornet among them, until those remaining and those concealed perish before your face.
You shall not be terrified because of their presence, since YHVH your God is among you, an El great and fear-inspiring.
YHVH your God will ease these nations out before your face, little by little. You shall not be able to finish them quickly, lest the land become a wilderness and the animal of the field multiply against you.
Yet YHVH your God will give them up before you and discomfit them with a great discomfiture until they are exterminated.
He will give their kings into your hand, and you will destroy their name from under the heavens. No man shall station himself in your presence until you exterminate them.
You shall burn the carvings of their God with fire. You shall not covet the silver and gold on them or take it for yourselves, lest you be trapped by it, for it is an abhorrence to YHVH your God.
You shall not bring an abhorrence into your house, or you will become doomed just like it is. You shall reject it as abominable, yea abominable; you shall reject it as abhorrent, yea abhorrent, for it is doomed.
All the instruction which I am enjoining on you today you shall observe to obey, that you may live and multiply and enter and tenant the land about which YHVH had sworn to your fathers.
And remember all the way which YHVH your God caused you to go these forty years in the wilderness, that He might make you humble, to probe you so as to know what is in your heart, whether or not you shall observe His instructions.
So He made you humble and let you hunger; then He fed you with the manna which neither you had known, nor had your fathers known, that He might make you realize that not on bread alone shall the human live, for by every utterance from the mouth of YHVH shall the human live.
Your garment has not worn out on you, nor did your foot swell these forty years,
So you know with your heart that just as a man disciplines his son, YHVH your God is disciplining you.
Hence observe the instructions of YHVH your God so as to walk in His ways and to fear Him.
For YHVH your God is bringing you into a land good and wide, a land of watercourses, with water from springs and from the abyss coming forth in valley and in mountain,
a land of wheat and barley and vine and fig and pomegranate, a land of olive oil and honey,
a land in which you may eat bread, not in frugality. You shall not lack anything in it, a land whose stones have iron-ore, and from its mountain ranges you may hew copper.
When you have eaten and are satisfied, then bless YHVH your God for the good land that He has given to you.
Guard yourself lest you should forget YHVH your God by failing to observe His instructions and His judgments and His statutes that I am enjoining on you today,
lest, when you eat and are satisfied and build good houses and dwell in them,
and your herd and your flock multiply, and silver and gold increase for you, and all that is yours is abundant,
then your heart becomes exalted and you forget YHVH your God Who was bringing you forth from the country of Egypt, from the house of servants,
Who was causing you to go through the great and fear-inspiring wilderness with burning serpents and scorpions and thirsty ground in which there is no water, Who was bringing forth for you water from the flinty rock,
Who was feeding you in the wilderness with manna, which your fathers had not known, that He might make you humble and that He might probe you, to do you good in your latter days.
Guard yourself lest you say in your heart: My vigor and the staunchness of my hand make for me this great estate.
Yet you will remember YHVH your God, for He is the One giving to you the vigor to make this estate, that He may confirm His covenant that He had sworn to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob, as in this day.
It will come to be that if you forget, yea forget YHVH your God and go after other God and serve them and bow yourself down to them, I testify against you today that you shall perish, yea perish.
Like the nations which YHVH is destroying before your face so shall you perish, inasmuch as you do not hearken to the voice of YHVH your God.
Hear, Israel! Today you are ready to cross over the Jordan, to enter to tenant in the place of nations greater and more substantial than you, cities great and defended to the heavens,
a people great and tall, the sons of the Anakim whom you know and of whom you have heard it said: Who shall station himself before the sons of Anak?
Know then today that YHVH your God, He is the One crossing over before you as a devouring fire. He Himself shall exterminate them, and He Himself shall make them submit before you; yet you must evict them and destroy them quickly just as YHVH has spoken to you.
Do not say in your heart when YHVH your God thrusts them out from before you, saying: Because of my own righteousness YHVH brings me in to tenant this land. Rather it is because of the wickedness of these nations that YHVH is evicting them before your face.
It is not because of your own righteousness or the uprightness of your own heart that you are entering to tenant their country, for it is because of the wickedness of these nations that YHVH your God is evicting them before your face, so that He may confirm the word that YHVH had sworn to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob.
Know then that it is not because of your own righteousness that YHVH your God is giving to you this good land to tenant it, for you are a stiff-necked people.
Remember, do not forget that you provoked YHVH your God to wrath in the wilderness. From the day in which you went forth from the country of Egypt until you came to this place, you were rebellious against YHVH.
And at Horeb you provoked YHVH to wrath, and YHVH showed Himself angered with you enough to exterminate you.
When I ascended to the mountain to take down the tablets of stone, the tablets of the covenant that YHVH contracted with you, I dwelt on the mountain forty days and forty nights. Bread I did not eat, and water I did not drink.
Then YHVH gave to me the two tablets of stone, written by the finger of God, and on them were all the words just like those that YHVH had spoken with you at the mountain from the midst of the fire on the day of the assembly.
It came to be at the end of forty days and forty nights that YHVH gave to me the two tablets of stone, the tablets of the covenant.
Then YHVH said to me: Arise! Go down quickly hence, for your people, whom you brought forth from Egypt have become corrupt. They have withdrawn quickly from the way which I had instructed them. They have made for themselves a molten calf.
And YHVH spoke to me saying: I have seen this people, and behold, they are a stiff-necked people.
Hold yourself back from Me so that I shall exterminate them and wipe out their name from under the heavens, and I shall make you into a more substantial and numerous nation than they.
Then I turned around and came down from the mountain while the mountain was consuming with fire; and the two tablets of the covenant were in my two hands.
Then I saw, and behold, you had sinned against YHVH your God. You had made for yourselves a molten calf. You had withdrawn quickly from the way about which YHVH had enjoined on you.
So I grabbed the two tablets and flung them from my two hands and broke them before your eyes.
Then I cast myself down before YHVH as the first time for forty days and forty nights. Bread I did not eat, and water I did not drink on account of all your sin which you had sinned by doing what was evil in the eyes of YHVH your God to provoke Him to vexation.
For I shrank away from the presence of the anger and the fury with which YHVH was wrathful against you enough to exterminate you. But YHVH hearkened to me even at that time.
Against Aaron YHVH showed Himself exceedingly angered, enough to exterminate him. So I prayed also about Aaron at that time.
As for your sin, which was the calf you had made, I took it, burned it with fire and pounded it, grinding it well until it was pulverized to soil, and I flung its soil into the watercourse that was descending from the mountain.
Also at Taberah and at Massah and at Kibroth-hattaavah you were causing YHVH to be wrathful.
And when YHVH sent you from Kadesh-barnea, saying: Ascend and tenant the land that I give to you, then you defied the bidding of YHVH your God and did not put your trust in Him nor hearken to His voice.
You have been rebellious against YHVH from the day I knew you.
When I cast myself down before YHVH (during the forty days and forty nights that I had cast myself down, for YHVH had said He would exterminate you),
then I prayed to YHVH and said: My Lord YHVH, do not bring ruin on Your people and Your allotment, whom You ransomed by Your greatness, whom You brought forth from Egypt by Your steadfast hand.
Remember Your servants, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Do not face against the obstinancy of this people, against their wickedness and their sin,
lest the people of the country whence You brought us forth should say: Because YHVH was unable to bring them into the land about which He had spoken to them, and because of His hatred of them He brought them forth to put them to death in the wilderness.
Yet they are Your people and Your allotment whom You brought forth from Egypt by Your great vigor and by Your outstretched arm.
At that time YHVH said to me: Carve for yourself two stone tablets like the first ones, and ascend to Me to the mountain. Also make for yourself a coffer of wood.
Then I shall write on the tablets the words that were on the first tablets that you broke, and you will place them in the coffer.
So I made a coffer of acacia wood, carved two tablets of stone like the first ones and ascended to the mountain with the two tablets in my hand.
Then He wrote on the tablets, like the first writing, the ten words that YHVH had spoken to you at the mountain from the midst of the fire on the day of the assembly; and YHVH gave them to me.
So I turned around and descended from the mountain and placed the tablets in the coffer that I had made, and there they came to be, just as YHVH had instructed me.
(The sons of Israel journeyed from the wells of Bene-jaakan to Moserah. There Aaron died, and he was entombed there; and Eleazar his son served as priest in his stead.
From there they journeyed to Gudgodah and from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a country of watercourses with water.
At that time YHVH separated the tribe of Levi to carry the coffer of the covenant of YHVH, to stand before YHVH to minister to Him and to bless in His name until this day.
Therefore Levi came to have no portion or allotment with his brothers. YHVH, He is his allotment, just as YHVH your God had spoken concerning him.)
As for me, I stayed on the mountain as on the first days, forty days and forty nights, and YHVH hearkened to me also at that time: YHVH would not bring ruin on you.
Then YHVH said to me: Arise! Go on your journey before this people that they may enter and tenant the land about which I had sworn to their fathers to give to them.
And now, Israel, what is YHVH your God asking of you, save to fear YHVH your God, to walk in all His ways, to love Him and to serve YHVH your God with all your heart and with all your soul,
to observe the instructions of YHVH your God and His statutes that I am enjoining on you today for your good?
Behold, to YHVH your God belong the heavens and the heavens of the heavens, the earth and all that is in it.
But YHVH was attached to your fathers to love them so that He chooses their seed after them, you, out of all the peoples, as it is this day.
Hence you will circumcise the foreskin of your heart, and you should no longer stiffen your neck.
For YHVH your God, He is God of God and the Lord of lords, the El, the great, the masterful and the fear-inspiring One, Who neither lifts up faces in partiality nor takes a bribe,
the One executing judgment of orphan and widow, the One loving the sojourner, so as to give him bread and garment.
You will love the sojourner, for you became sojourners in the country of Egypt.
YHVH your God shall you fear, and Him shall you serve; to Him shall you cling, and by His name shall you swear.
He is your praise, and He is your God Who did for you these great and fear-inspiring deeds that your eyes saw.
With seventy souls your fathers went down to Egypt. Yet now YHVH your God has made you as the stars of the heavens for multitude.
Hence you will love YHVH your God and observe His charge, His statutes, His judgments and His instructions all the days.
You know today, (though not your sons, who have not known and who have not seen) the discipline of YHVH your God, His greatness, His steadfast hand and His outstretched arm,
His signs and His deeds that He did in the midst of Egypt to Pharaoh king of Egypt and to all his country
and what He did to Egypt's army, to its horses and to its chariots, when He caused the waters of the Sea of Weeds to float over their faces in their pursuit after you; thus YHVH destroyed them until this day.
You know what He did for you in the wilderness until you came as far as this place,
and what He did to Dathan and to Abiram, sons of Eliab son of Reuben, when the earth opened wide its mouth and swallowed them up even with their households and their tents and everyone who had risen, who had walked in their footsteps, from among all Israel.
For your eyes were the ones seeing all the great deeds of YHVH that He has done.
Hence observe every instruction which I am enjoining on you today, that you may be steadfast, enter and tenant the land where you are crossing over to tenant it,
and that you may prolong your days on the ground about which YHVH had sworn to your fathers to give to them and to their seed, a land gushing with milk and honey.
For the land, where you are entering to tenant it, is not like the country of Egypt, that one from where you came forth, in which you sowed your seed and irrigated it with your foot as a garden of greens.
But the land, where you are crossing over to tenant it, is a land of hills and valleys; it drinks water from the rain of the heavens;
a land which YHVH your God is caring for. Continually are the eyes of YHVH your God on it from the beginning of the year until the last part of the year.
It will come to be when you shall hearken, yea hearken to My instructions that I am enjoining on you today, to love YHVH your God and to serve Him with all your heart and with all your soul,
then He will give rain to your land in its season, the former rain and the latter rain. You will gather your grain, your grape juice and your clarified oil,
and He will give herbage in your field for your domestic beasts; thus you will eat and be satisfied.
Guard yourselves lest your heart should be enticed, and you withdraw, serve other God and bow down to them.
Then the anger of YHVH will grow hot against you, and He will restrain the heavens so that there shall be no rain, and the ground shall not give its crop, and you will perish quickly off the good land that YHVH is giving to you.
Hence place these my words in your heart and in your soul, and tie them as a sign on your hand, and let them come to be as brow-bands between your eyes.
Teach them to your sons, speaking of them when you sit in your house, when you walk on the road, when you lie down and when you arise.
Write them on the jambs of your house and on your gates,
that your days and the days of your sons may be many on the ground about which YHVH had sworn to your fathers to give to them, as many as the days of the heavens over the earth.
For if you should observe, yea observe all this instruction which I am enjoining on you today, to obey it, to love YHVH your God, to walk in all His ways and to cling to Him,
then YHVH will evict all these nations from before you, and you will tenant in the place of nations greater and more substantial than you.
Every place on which the sole of your foot treads shall become yours. From the wilderness and the Lebanon, from the great stream, the stream Euphrates, as far as the western sea shall become your territory.
No man shall station himself in your presence. The awe of you and the fear of you shall YHVH your God put over the face of the entire land on which you shall tread, just as He has spoken to you.
See! I am setting before you today blessing and malediction:
the blessing if you should hearken to the instructions of YHVH your God that I am enjoining on you today,
and the malediction if you should not hearken to the instructions of YHVH your God, and you withdraw from the way that I am enjoining on you today, by going after other God whom you have not known.
When it comes to be that YHVH your God shall bring you into the land where you are entering to tenant it, then you must pronounce the blessing on Mount Gerizim and the malediction on Mount Ebal.
Are they not across the Jordan, behind the sunset road into the country of the Canaanite, who is dwelling in the Aravah toward Gilgal beside the oaks of Moreh?
For you are crossing over the Jordan to enter and to tenant the land that YHVH your God is giving to you. When you tenant it and dwell in it,
then observe to obey all the statutes and the judgments which I am setting before you today.
These are the statutes and the judgments which you shall observe to obey in the land that YHVH God of your fathers gives to you to tenant it all the days that you are alive on the ground.
You shall destroy, yea destroy all the places where the nations (in whose stead you are tenanting) have served their God on the high mountains, on the hills and under every flourishing tree.
Tear down their altars and break their monuments; their Asherah poles you shall burn with fire, and the carvings of their God you shall hack down; thus you will destroy their name from that place.
Not so shall you do to YHVH your God.
But rather for the place that YHVH your God shall choose from all your tribes, to establish His name there, you shall inquire for His tabernacle, and there will you come.
You will bring there your ascent offerings and your sacrifices, your tithes and the heave offerings of your hand, your vows offerings and your voluntary offerings, and the firstlings of your herd and your flock.
You will eat there before YHVH your God, and you will rejoice in every undertaking of your hand, you and your households with which YHVH your God has blessed you.
You shall not do according to all that we are doing here today, each man everything that is upright in his own eyes
because until now you have not come to the resting place and to the allotment that YHVH your God is giving to you.
When you cross over the Jordan and dwell in the land that YHVH your God is giving to you as an allotment, and He gives rest to you from all your enemies from round about, so that you may dwell in trust,
then it will come to be: the place where YHVH your God shall choose to tabernacle His name, there shall you bring all that I am instructing you, your ascent offerings and your sacrifices, your tithes, the heave offerings of your hand and all your choice vow offerings which you shall vow to YHVH.
You will rejoice before YHVH your God, you, your sons and your daughters, your servants, your maidservants and the Levite who is within your gates, for he has no portion or allotment among you.
Guard yourself lest you bring up your ascent offerings in any other place which you see.
But rather in the place that YHVH shall choose in one of your tribes, there shall you bring up your ascent offerings, and there shall you do all that I am instructing you.
But with all the yearning of your soul you may sacrifice and eat flesh, according to the blessing of YHVH your God which He gives to you in all your gates. The unclean and the clean among you may eat it, as they would of the gazelle and as of the stag.
But the blood you shall not eat. On the earth shall you pour it out like water.
You cannot eat within your gates the tithe of your grain, of your grape juice and of your clarified oil, neither the firstlings of your herd and your flock nor any of your vow offerings which you shall vow, neither your voluntary offerings nor the heave offerings of your hand.
But rather you shall eat it before YHVH your God in the place that YHVH your God shall choose, you, your son and your daughter, your servant and your maidservant and the Levite who is within your gates. Then you will rejoice before YHVH your God in every undertaking of your hand.
Guard yourself lest you should forsake the Levite any of your days on your ground.
When YHVH your God widens your territory, just as He spoke to you, and you say: Let me eat flesh, for your soul yearns to eat flesh, you may eat flesh with all the yearning of your soul.
In case the place where YHVH your God shall choose to place His name is far from you, then you may sacrifice of your herd and of your flock which YHVH gave to you, just as I instructed you; and you may eat it within your gates with all the yearning of your soul.
Indeed, just as the gazelle and the stag may be eaten so shall you eat it. The unclean and the clean among you may eat it together.
But be steadfast by no means to eat the blood, for the blood, it is the soul, and you shall not eat the soul with the flesh.
You shall not eat it; on the earth shall you pour it out like water.
You shall not eat it that it may be well with you and with your sons after you, for you shall do what is good and upright in the eyes of YHVH.
But as for your holy gifts which you shall come to have, and your vow offerings, you shall carry them and come to the place that YHVH shall choose.
You will make your ascent offerings of the flesh and the blood on the altar of YHVH your God, and the blood of your sacrifices shall be poured out on the altar of YHVH your God, yet you may eat the flesh.
Observe and hear all these words which I am instructing you today, that it may be well with you and with your sons after you until the eon, for you shall do what is good and upright in the eyes of YHVH your God.
When YHVH your God cuts off before your face the nations where you are entering to tenant in their place, then you will tenant in their place and dwell in their country.
Guard yourself lest you should be trapped to go after them after they are exterminated before your face, and lest you inquire about their God, saying: How do these nations serve their God that I, I too, may do thus?
You shall not act thus toward YHVH your God, for every abhorrence which YHVH hates they perform for their God, for even their sons and their daughters they burn with fire for their God.
Every word which I am enjoining on you today, you shall observe to obey it. You shall neither add to it, nor shall you subtract from it.
In case there arises a prophet or a dreamer of dreams among you, and he gives to you a sign or a miracle,
and the sign or the miracle comes about, of which he spoke to you, saying: Let us go after other God (whom you have not known), and let us serve them,
you shall not hearken to the words of that prophet or to that dreamer of dreams because YHVH your God is probing you to know whether you are loving YHVH your God with all your heart and with all your soul.
After YHVH your God shall you go, and Him shall you fear; His instructions shall you observe, and to His voice shall you hearken; Him shall you serve, and to Him shall you cling.
Then that prophet or that dreamer of dreams shall be put to death because he spoke of defection from YHVH your God (the One bringing you forth from the country of Egypt and the One ransoming you from the house of servants) so as to induce you from the way in which YHVH your God has instructed you to walk. Hence eradicate the evil from among you.
In case your brother, the son of your father, or the son of your mother or your son or your daughter or the wife of your bosom or your associate who is as your own soul should incite you in concealment, saying: Let us go, and let us serve other God (whom you have not known, you or your fathers,
of God of the peoples who are around you, those near to you or those far from you, from one end of the land to the other end of the land):
neither shall you comply with him, nor shall you hearken to him; neither shall your eye commiserate over him, nor shall you spare him; and you shall not cover up for him.
For you shall kill, yea kill him. Your hand shall be among the first against him to put him to death, and the hand of all the people thereafter.
You will stone him with stones so that he dies, for he sought to induce you away from YHVH your God, the One bringing you forth from the country of Egypt, from the house of servants.
Thus all Israel shall hearken and fear, and they shall not again do anything like this evil thing among you.
In case you hear it said of one of your cities which YHVH your God is giving to you to dwell there,
that men, sons of decadence, have gone forth from among you and induced the dwellers of their city, saying: Let us go, and let us serve other God (whom you have not known),
then you will inquire, investigate and ask diligently. And behold, if the truth of the matter is being established that this abhorrence was done among you,
then you shall smite, yea smite the dwellers of that city with the edge of the sword. Doom it, all those who are in it and its domestic beasts, with the edge of the sword.
All its loot shall you get together to the middle of its square, and you will burn the city with fire and all its loot as a holocaust to YHVH your God. It will become an eonian barrow; it shall not be built again.
Nothing whatsoever shall cling to your hand from the doomed loot so that YHVH may turn back from the heat of His anger and be compassionate to you. He will show you compassion and cause you to increase, just as He had sworn to your fathers,
provided that you shall hearken to the voice of YHVH your God to observe all His instructions which I am enjoining on you today, to do what is upright and good in the eyes of YHVH your God.
Sons are you to YHVH your God; you shall neither slash yourselves nor make a baldness between your eyes for a dead one,
for you are a people holy to YHVH your God, and YHVH your God chose you to belong to Him as a special people above all the peoples who are on the surface of the ground.
You shall not eat anything abhorrent.
This is the beast that you may eat: the bull, the flockling of the sheep and the flockling of the goats;
the stag, the gazelle, the bubale, the wild goat, the addax, the antelope and the mountain sheep.
And any other beast bisecting the hoof, cleaving the cleft into two hooves and bringing up the cud, among beasts, it you may eat.
Only this you may not eat of those bringing up the cud and of those bisecting the cloven hoof: the camel, the hare and the coney, for they are bringing up the cud yet do not bisect the hoof; they are unclean to you;
and the swine, for it is bisecting the hoof and cleaving the cleft of the hoof, yet it is not stirring up the cud; it is unclean to you. From their flesh you shall not eat, and their carcass you shall not touch.
This may you eat of all that is in the waters: anything which has fins and scales you may eat.
Yet anything which has no fins and scales you shall not eat; it is unclean to you.
Any clean bird you may eat;
yet these are those of which you shall not eat: the vulture, the bearded vulture and the eagle,
the black kite and the falcon, all of its kind,
and every raven, all of its kind,
the ostrich, the screech owl, the gull and the hawk, all of its kind,
the little owl, the eagle owl and the ibis,
the pelican, the Egyptian vulture and the cormorant,
the stork and the heron, all of its kind, the hoopoe and the bat.
Every swarmer of the flyers, it is unclean to you. They shall not be eaten.
Every clean flyer you may eat.
You shall not eat any carcass. You may give it to the sojourner who is within your gates so that he may eat it, or you may sell it to a foreigner, for you are a people holy to YHVH your God. You shall not cook a kid in the milk of its mother.
You shall tithe, yea tithe all the yield of your seed which is coming forth from the field year by year.
You will eat before YHVH your God, in the place where YHVH your God shall choose to tabernacle His name, the tenth of your grain, your grape juice and your clarified oil, the firstlings of your herd and of your flock, that you may learn to fear YHVH your God all the days.
Yet in case the way is too much for you, so that you are not able to carry it because the place where YHVH your God shall choose to place His name is far from you (seeing that YHVH your God has blessed you),
then you will convert it into silver, bundle the silver in your hand and go to the place that YHVH your God shall choose.
You will give the silver for anything after which your soul may yearn: for one of the herd or one of the flock, for wine, for intoxicant or for anything which your soul may ask of you; then you will eat there before YHVH your God, and you will rejoice, you and your household.
Now the Levite who is within your gates, you shall not forsake him, for he has no portion or allotment with you.
At the end of every three years you shall bring forth all the tithe of your yield in that year and leave it within your gates,
that the Levite may come (for he has no portion or allotment with you), and the sojourner, the orphan and the widow who are within your gates, and they may eat and be satisfied, so that YHVH your God may bless you in all the work of your hand which you do.
At the end of seven years you shall make a release.
And this is the term of the release: every possessor is to release the loan of his hand that he lent to his associate. He shall not exact it from his associate or his brother, for YHVH's release has been proclaimed.
From the foreigner you may exact it. Yet that which you came to have from your brother, let your hand release it;
only that there should be no needy among you, for YHVH shall bless, yea bless you in the land that YHVH your God is giving to you as an allotment to tenant it.
Now if you should hearken, yea hearken to the voice of YHVH your God so as to observe to obey all this instruction that I am enjoining on you today,
then YHVH your God will bless you, just as He promised to you. And you will cause many nations to give you securities, yet you yourself shall give no securities. You will rule over many nations, but they shall not rule over you.
In case there should be among you a needy person, one of your brothers within one of your gates in your land that YHVH your God is giving to you, you shall neither make your heart rigid nor shut your hand from your needy brother.
Rather you shall open, yea open your hand to him and let him give security, yea security sufficient for his lack that is lacking to him.
Guard yourself lest there should be in your heart the decadent word, saying: The seventh year is near, the year of the release, so that your eye is evil toward your needy brother, and you give him nothing. Then he may call out to YHVH concerning you, and it will be held as a sin against you.
You shall give, yea give to him, and your heart shall not feel bad at your giving to him. For owing to this matter YHVH your God shall bless you in all your work and in every undertaking of your hand.
Since the needy shall not leave off from being within the land, therefore I am instructing you, saying: You shall open, yea open your hand to your brother, to your humble and to your needy in your land.
In case your brother should be sold to you, a Hebrew man or a Hebrew woman, who has served you six years, then in the seventh year you shall dismiss him from you free.
And when you dismiss him from you free you shall not send him away empty-handed.
You shall furnish, yea furnish him some from your flock, from your threshing site and from your wine vat; just as YHVH your God has blessed you shall you give to him.
Remember that you had become a servant in the country of Egypt, and YHVH your God ransomed you. Therefore I am instructing you to obey this word today.
But it may be that he says to you: I shall not go forth from you, since he loves you and your household because it was well for him with you.
Then you take an awl and put it through his ear and into the door, and he will come to be your eonian servant; and so you shall do to your maidservant too.
It should not seem hard in your eyes when you dismiss him from you free because he was worth double the hire of a hireling when he served you six years. So YHVH your God will bless you in all that you shall do.
All the firstborn males that shall be born in your herd and in your flock you shall sanctify to YHVH your God. You shall neither serve with the firstborn of your kine nor shall you shear the firstborn of your flock.
You shall eat it before YHVH your God year by year in the place that YHVH shall choose, you and your household.
Yet in case there should be a blemish in it, lame or blind, any bad blemish, you shall not sacrifice it to YHVH your God.
Within your gates you may eat it, the unclean among you and the clean together, as you would of the gazelle and of the stag.
But its blood you shall not eat. On the earth shall you pour it out like water.
You are to observe the month of Aviv and prepare a passover to YHVH your God, for in the month of Aviv YHVH your God brought you forth from Egypt by night.
So you will sacrifice the passover to YHVH your God from the flock and the herd in the place where YHVH your God shall choose to tabernacle His name.
You shall not eat anything leavened with it. Seven days shall you eat unleavened cakes with it, the bread of humiliation (for in nervous haste you went forth from the country of Egypt), that you may remember the day of your going forth from the country of Egypt all the days of your life.
Let no yeast be seen with you in all your territory seven days. And let none of the flesh that you shall sacrifice in the evening on the first day lodge until morning.
You cannot sacrifice the passover within any one of your gates which YHVH your God is giving to you,
but rather only in the place that YHVH your God shall choose to tabernacle His name. There shall you sacrifice the passover in the evening as the sun sets, the appointed time of your going forth from Egypt.
Then you will cook and eat in the place that YHVH your God shall choose, and you may turn around in the morning and go to your tents.
Six days shall you eat unleavened cakes, and on the seventh day, a day of restraint to YHVH your God, you shall do no occupational work at all.
You shall count off seven weeks for yourself. From the start of the scythe in the raised grain shall you start to count off seven weeks.
Then you will observe the celebration of weeks to YHVH your God with a tribute of a voluntary offering from your hand which you shall give, just as YHVH your God may have blessed you.
You will rejoice before YHVH your God, you, your son and your daughter, your servant and your maidservant, the Levite who is within your gates, the sojourner, the orphan and the widow who are among you, in the place where YHVH your God shall choose to tabernacle His name.
Remember that you had become a servant in the country of Egypt; hence observe and obey these statutes.
As for the celebration of booths, you shall observe it for yourself seven days when you gather in the yield from your threshing site and from your wine vat.
You will rejoice in your celebration, you, your son and your daughter, your servant and your maidservant, the Levite, the sojourner, the orphan and the widow who are within your gates.
Seven days shall you celebrate to YHVH your God in the place that YHVH your God shall choose, for YHVH your God shall bless you in all your yield and in every work of your hands, so that you will indeed be rejoicing.
Three times in the year all your males shall appear before YHVH your God in the place that He shall choose: at the celebration of unleavened cakes, at the celebration of weeks and at the celebration of booths. And none shall appear before YHVH empty-handed,
but each according to the gift of his hand, according to the blessing which YHVH your God will give to you.
You shall appoint judges and superintendents for yourselves in all your gates which YHVH your God is giving to you for your tribes; and they will judge the people with just judgment.
You shall not turn aside the judgment; you shall neither recognize faces in partiality nor take a bribe, for the bribe blinds the eyes of the wise and subverts the words of the righteous.
Justice and justice only shall you pursue, so that you may live and tenant the land that YHVH your God is giving to you.
Neither shall you plant for yourself an Asherah pole, any kind of wood, beside the altar of YHVH your God which you may make for yourself,
nor shall you set up for yourself a monument that YHVH your God hates.
You shall not sacrifice to YHVH your God a bull or a flockling in which there is a blemish, any bad thing, for it is an abhorrence to YHVH your God.
In case there should be found among you, within one of your gates which YHVH your God is giving to you, a man or a woman who does evil in the eyes of YHVH your God so as to trespass against His covenant,
and he goes and serves other God and bows himself down to them or to the sun or to the moon or to any of the host of the heavens, something that I have instructed not to do,
and it has been told to you and you have heard it, then you will inquire diligently. And behold, if the truth of the matter is established that this abhorrence was done in Israel,
then you must bring forth that man or that woman who did this evil thing to your gates, the man or the woman, and you will stone them with stones so that they die.
At the mouth of two witnesses or three witnesses, the one about to die shall be put to death. He shall not be put to death at the mouth of one witness.
The hands of the witnesses shall come to be the first against him to put him to death and then the hands of all the people afterward. Thus you will eradicate the evil from among you.
In case a matter for judgment should be too difficult for you, between blood and blood, between adjudication and adjudication and between assault and assault, any matters of contentions in your gates, then you will arise and ascend to the place which YHVH your God shall choose.
And you will come to the priests, the Levites, and to the judge who shall come to be in those days; they will inquire and tell you the word of judgment.
Then you must act in accordance with the word that they shall tell you from that place that YHVH your God shall choose. You must observe to act according to all that they shall direct you.
In accordance with the law by which they shall direct you and according to the judgment that they shall deliver to you, you shall act. You shall not withdraw from the word that they shall tell you, neither to the right nor left.
Yet the man who acts with arrogance by not hearkening at all to the priest (who is standing to minister in the name of YHVH your God) or to the judge, that man must die. Thus you will eradicate the evil from Israel,
and all the people shall hear and fear, and not act arrogantly again.
When you come to the land that YHVH your God is giving to you, and you tenant it and dwell in it, and you say: Let me set a king over me like all the nations who are around me,
then you shall set, yea set over you a king whom YHVH your God shall choose. From among your brothers shall you set a king over you. You cannot put over you a foreign man who is not of your brothers.
But he shall neither increase horses for himself nor cause his people to return to Egypt in order to get many more horses, for YHVH, He has said to you: You should not again return in this way further.
He shall neither increase wives for himself, that his heart may not withdraw, nor increase silver and gold for himself to excess.
It will come to be when he is seated on the throne of his kingdom, that he will write for himself a duplicate of this law on a scroll from the one before the priests, the Levites.
And it will be with him, and he will read in it all the days of his life that he may learn: to fear YHVH your God, to observe all the words of this law and these statutes to obey them,
by no means to exalt his heart above his brothers and by no means to withdraw from the instruction, neither to the right nor left, so that he may prolong his days on the throne of his kingdom, he and his sons among Israel.
There shall be for the priests, the Levites the entire tribe of Levi neither portion nor allotment with Israel. They shall eat the fire offerings of YHVH as their allotment.
Yet there shall be for them no allotment among their brothers. YHVH, He is their allotment, just as He had spoken concerning them.
This then shall be the priest's due share from the people, from the ones sacrificing the sacrifice, whether bull or flockling; one will give to the priest the shank, both the cheeks and the pelvis.
You shall give to him the firstfruit of your grain, of your grape juice and your clarified oil and the first of the fleece of your flock;
for YHVH your God has chosen him from all your tribes to stand before YHVH your God to minister and to bless in the name of YHVH, him and his sons, all the days.
In case a Levite should come from one of your gates, from anywhere in Israel where he sojourned, he may come with all the yearning of his soul to the place that YHVH shall choose;
then he may minister in the name of YHVH his God, like all his brothers, the Levites, those standing there before YHVH.
Portion for portion shall he eat, besides what comes from his sales of the fathers' holdings.
When you come to the land that YHVH your God is giving to you, you shall not learn to act according to the abhorrences of those nations.
There shall not be found among you one causing his son or his daughter to pass through fire, or one divining divinations, or consulting clouds, auguring or enchanting
or charming with charms, one asking of a medium or wizard or inquiring after the dead.
For anyone doing these things is an abhorrence to YHVH your God, and owing to these abhorrences YHVH your God is evicting them from your presence.
Flawless shall you come to be with YHVH your God.
For these nations in whose place you are tenanting, they hearken to cloud consulters and diviners. As for you, YHVH your God does not allow you to do so.
A Prophet from among you, from your brothers, like me, shall YHVH your God raise up for you. To Him shall you hearken
according to all that you asked from YHVH your God at Horeb on the day of assembly, saying: Let me not continue to hear the voice of YHVH my God, and let me not see this great fire any further so that I may not die!
Then YHVH said to me: They have done well in all that they have spoken.
A Prophet shall I raise up to them from among their brothers, like you, and I will put My words in His mouth, and He will speak to them all that I shall instruct Him.
Yet it will come to be that the man who should not hearken to My words that the Prophet shall speak in My name, I Myself shall require his blood from him.
But the prophet who shall act arrogantly by speaking a word in My name which I did not instruct him to speak, or who shall speak in the name of other God, that prophet must die.
In case you should say in your heart: How shall we know the word that YHVH has not spoken?
When a prophet shall speak in the name of YHVH, and the word shall neither come to be nor come about, then it is a word that YHVH did not speak, In arrogance did the prophet speak it. You shall not shrink away from him in awe.
When YHVH your God cuts off the nations whose country YHVH your God is giving to you, and you tenant in their place and dwell in their cities and in their houses,
you shall separate for yourself three cities in the midst of your land that YHVH your God is giving to you to tenant it.
You shall prepare for yourself the road to them and trisect the territory of your land that YHVH your God shall give to you as an allotment; and it will come to be that every manslayer is to flee there.
This is the word about the manslayer who may flee there and live: Whoever should smite his associate without knowledge when he was not hating him heretofore,
or he who should come with his associate into the wildwood to chop trees, and his hand may be impelled with the axe to cut down a tree, and the iron head flies off the wooden handle and finds his associate so that he dies, that man, he shall flee to one of these cities that he may live.
Otherwise the redeemer of blood may pursue after the manslayer while his heart is furious, and he may overtake him because the road is long enough, and he may smite his soul even though he had no judgment of death, seeing that he was not hating him heretofore.
Therefore I am instructing you, saying: Three cities shall you separate for yourself.
And when YHVH your God widens your territory just as He had sworn to your fathers, and gives to you the whole land that He had promised to give to your fathers
(in case you observe all of this instruction to obey it, that I am enjoining on you today, to love YHVH your God and to walk in His ways all the days), then you must add for yourself three more cities to these three.
Thus within your land that YHVH your God is giving to you as an allotment, the blood of the innocent shall not be shed so that no guilt of bloodshed comes to be on you.
But if a man is hating his associate, and he waits in ambush for him, rises against him and smites his soul so that he dies, and he flees to one of these cities,
then the elders of his city will send for him, take him from there and give him into the hand of the redeemer of blood so that he may die.
Your eye shall not commiserate over him. Thus you will eradicate from Israel the shedding of innocent blood, and it will be well with you.
You shall not move away the boundary marker of your associate by which the former ones bounded your allotment that you are allotted in the land that YHVH your God is giving to you to tenant it.
A single witness shall not rise against a man regarding any depravity or any sin. In any sin which one may sin, the matter shall be confirmed at the mouth of two witnesses or at the mouth of three witnesses.
In case a malicious witness should rise against a man asserting his defection,
then the two men who have the contention must stand before YHVH and before the priests and the judges who shall come to be in those days.
The judges will inquire diligently, and behold, should the false witness assert false testimony against his brother,
then you must do to him just as he schemed to do to his brother. Thus you will eradicate the evil from among you.
The remainder shall hearken and fear, and they shall no longer continue to do anything like this evil matter among you.
Your eye shall not commiserate: soul for soul, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
When you go forth for battle against your enemies, and you see horses and chariots and a people more numerous than you, you should not fear them, for YHVH your God is with you, the One bringing you up from the country of Egypt.
Then it will be as you approach to the battle that the priest will come close and speak to the people.
He will say to them: Hear, Israel! You are near today to the battle against your enemies. Let not your heart be timid, do not fear, do not be in nervous haste and do not be terrified because of their presence.
for YHVH your God is the One going with you to fight for you with your enemies and to save you.
And the superintendents will speak to the people, saying: Whoever the man be who has built a new house and has not dedicated it yet, may go and return to his house, lest he should die in the battle and another man should dedicate it.
And whoever the man be who has planted a vineyard and has not taken it yet for profane use may go and return to his house, lest he should die in the battle and another man should take it for profane use.
And whoever the man be who has betrothed a woman and has not taken her yet, may go and return to his house, lest he should die in the battle and another man should take her.
Then the superintendents will continue to speak to the people and say: Whoever the man be who is fearful and timid of heart may go and return to his house so that the heart of his brothers may not be melted as his own heart is.
And it will come to be when the superintendents have finished speaking to the people that they will commit chiefs of the militia hosts at the head of the people.
When you come near to a city to fight against it then you should call to it for peace.
And it will come to be if it should answer you with peace, and it opens up to you, then it will come to be that all the people who are being found in it shall become tributary to you, and they will serve you.
Yet if it should not make peace with you but engages in battle with you, then you must besiege it.
When YHVH your God delivers it into your hand, then you will smite every adult male of it with the edge of the sword;
but the women, the little ones, the domestic beasts and all that is in the city, all its loot, you may plunder for yourself; and you may eat from the loot of your enemies which YHVH your God gives to you.
Thus shall you deal with all the cities which are the very farthest from you, those that are not of the cities of these nations.
But in the cities of these peoples which YHVH your God is giving to you as an allotment you shall not keep alive anything that has breath,
for you shall doom, yea doom them, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Girgashite, the Perizzite, the Hivite and the Jebusite, just as YHVH your God had instructed you,
that they may not teach you to act according to all their abhorrences which they do for their God so that you might sin against YHVH your God.
When you besiege a city many days to battle against it to grab it, you shall bring ruin on no tree of it by wielding an axe against it; if you may eat of it, you shall not cut them down; for is the tree of the field a human to come before your face in the siege?
But a tree that you know it is not a tree for food, you may bring ruin on it and cut it down, so you may build siege-works against the city which is engaging in battle with you until it comes down.
In case someone mortally wounded is found on the ground that YHVH your God is giving to you to tenant it, having fallen in the field, and it is not known who smote him fatally,
then your elders and your judges will go forth and measure the distance to the cities that are around the mortally wounded one.
And it will come to be that of the city nearest to the mortally wounded one, the elders of that city will take a heifer of the herd by which no one has been served and which has not drawn in a yoke.
The elders of that city will bring the heifer down to a perennial watercourse by which no one was served and it was not sown, and they will behead the heifer there in the watercourse.
Then the priests, the sons of Levi, will come close, for YHVH your God has chosen them to minister to Him and to bless in the name of YHVH, and at their bidding every contention and every assault shall come to be settled.
Then all the elders of that city, the ones nearest to the mortally wounded one, shall wash their hands over the beheaded heifer in the watercourse,
and they will respond and say: Our hands, they have not shed this blood, and our eyes, they have not seen it.
Make a propitiatory shelter for Your people, Israel, whom You have ransomed, YHVH, and let not guilt for the blood of the innocent remain among Your people, Israel. Thus a propitiatory shelter for them will be made concerning this bloodshed.
So you yourself shall eradicate the shedding of innocent blood from among you, for you shall do what is upright in the eyes of YHVH.
When you go forth for battle against your enemy, and YHVH your God delivers him into your hand, and you capture his captives,
and you see among the captives a woman of lovely shape and are attached to her and take her to yourself as a wife,
then you will bring her into the midst of your household, where she will shave her head and pare her nails.
She will put away the garment of her captivity from her and dwell in your house. Then she will lament her father and her mother a month of days, and afterward you may come to her and may possess her, and she will become yours as a wife.
Should it come to be that you find no delight in her, then you will dismiss her to go at her soul's desire. You shall not sell, yea sell her for silver; you shall not make a chattel of her, inasmuch as you have humiliated her.
In case a man should come to have two wives, the one loved and the other disliked, and they bear sons for him, the loved and the disliked, but the firstborn is the son of the disliked one,
then it will come to be in the day when he gives allotments to his sons of that which is his, that he should not be able to treat as firstborn the son of the loved in preference to the son of the disliked, who is the firstborn.
For he shall recognize the firstborn son of the disliked by giving to him a double share of all that is being found his; since he is the beginning of his virility, the customary right of the firstborn belongs to him.
In case a son of a man should become stubborn and rebellious, and he is not hearkening to the voice of his father or to the voice of his mother, and they discipline him, but he does not hearken to them,
then his father and his mother will grasp him and bring him forth to the elders of his city, at the gate of his place.
They will say to the elders of his city: This son of ours is stubborn and rebellious. He is not hearkening to our voice. He is a glutton and carouser.
Then all the men of his city will pelt him with stones so that he dies. Thus you will eradicate the evil from among you, and all Israel shall hear and fear.
In case there should be in a man a sin incurring a judgment of death so that he is put to death, and you hang him on a tree,
his carcass shall not lodge on the tree all night, for you shall entomb, yea entomb him on that day, for one being hung is under a malediction of God, and you shall not defile your ground that YHVH your God is giving to you as an allotment.
You shall not see your brother's bull or his flockling or any domestic beast of his wandering away and then obscure yourself from them. You shall restore, yea restore them to your brother.
If your brother is neither near to you nor do you know him, then you will gather it to the midst of your household, and it will come to be with you until your brother inquires for it, and you restore it to him.
So shall you do with his donkey, so shall you do with his garment, and so shall you do with every loss of your brother which is being lost by him, when you find it. You shall not be able to obscure yourself.
You shall not see your brother's donkey or his bull or any domestic beast of his fallen on the road and obscure yourself from them. You shall raise, yea raise them with him.
A master's apparel shall neither come to be on a woman, nor shall a master put on a woman's garment, for anyone doing these things is an abhorrence to YHVH your God.
In case a bird's nest should happen to be before you along the road in any tree or on the earth, with chicks or eggs, and the mother brooding over the chicks or on the eggs, you shall not take the mother with the young.
You shall let the mother go, yea go, yet the young you may take for yourself that it may be well with you, and you may prolong your days.
When you build a new house, then you must make a parapet for your housetop so that you do not bring blood-guilt on your house in case someone falling from it might fall to death.
You shall not sow your vineyard dissimilarly lest the full yield shall be holy: both the seed which you are sowing and the yield of the vineyard.
You shall not plow with a bull and a donkey together.
You shall not put on linsey-woolsey, wool and flax together.
Braided cords shall you make for yourself on the four hems of your covering with which you cover yourself.
In case a man should take a wife, and he comes in to her, yet then he hates her,
charges her with iniquitous words and brings forth a bad name on her and says: I took this woman, and I came near to her and found no evidence of virginity on her,
then the father of the maiden and her mother will take and bring forth the maiden's proof of virginity to the elders of the city at the gate.
And the maiden's father will say to the elders: I gave my daughter to this man as wife, but he hates her.
And behold, he charges her with iniquitous words, saying: I found no evidence of virginity on your daughter. Yet this is the proof of my daughter's virginity; and they will spread the garment before the elders of the city.
Then the elders of that city will take the man and flog him,
fine him a hundred shekels of silver and give them to the father of the maiden, for he brought forth a bad name on a virgin of Israel. And she shall remain his wife; he cannot dismiss her all his days.
Yet if this matter be true and no proof of virginity is found for the maiden,
then they will bring forth the maiden to the portal of her father's house, and the men of her city will stone her with stones so that she dies, for she committed decadence in Israel so as to prostitute herself while in her father's house. Thus you will eradicate the evil from among you.
In case a man should be found lying with a woman possessed by a possessor, then they must die, indeed both of them, the man who was lying with the woman and the woman. Thus you will eradicate the evil from Israel.
In case there should be a maiden, a virgin, who is betrothed to a man, and another man finds her in the city, and he lies with her,
then you must bring forth both of them to the gate of that city and stone them with stones so that they die, the maiden on the score that she did not cry for help in the city, and the man on the score that he humiliated the wife of his associate. Thus you will eradicate the evil from among you.
Yet if it is in the field that the man should find the maiden who is betrothed, and the man holds her fast and lies with her, then the man who lay with her must die, he alone;
yet to the maiden you shall do nothing. The maiden has no sin deserving death; for as when a man rises against his associate, and he murders his soul, so is this matter.
For he found her in the field; the maiden who is betrothed cried for help, and there was no saviour for her.
In case a man should find a maiden, a virgin who is not betrothed, and he grasps her and lies with her, and they are found,
then the man who is lying with her must give to the maiden's father fifty shekels of silver, and she shall become his wife. Inasmuch as he humiliated her he shall not be able to dismiss her all his days.
A man shall neither take the wife of his father nor expose the hem of his father.
No one emasculated by the crushing of his testicles or having his penis cut off shall come into the assembly of YHVH.
No foreigner shall come into the assembly of YHVH. Even the tenth generation from him may not come into the assembly of YHVH.
No Ammonite or Moabite shall come into the assembly of YHVH. Even the tenth generation from them shall not come into the assembly of YHVH for the eon,
on the score that they did not succor you with bread and with water along the main road when you came forth from Egypt and that they hired against you Balaam son of Beor, from Pethor, Aram-naharayim, to maledict you.
But YHVH your God would not hearken to Balaam. And YHVH your God turned the malediction into a blessing for you, for YHVH your God loves you.
You shall neither inquire after their welfare nor their good all your days for the eon.
You shall not abhor an Edomite, for he is your brother. You shall not abhor an Egyptian, for you became a sojourner in his country.
As for the sons who shall be born to them, the third generation may come into the assembly of YHVH.
When you go forth in camp against your enemies then you must be on guard against any evil matter.
In case there should be a man among you who is not clean because of a happening of the night, then he must go forth outside the camp; he shall not come into the midst of the camp.
When it comes to be just before evening he shall wash in water, and as the sun sets he may come into the midst of the camp.
A place aside shall come to be for you outside the camp, and you must go forth there outside.
You shall come to have a peg with your gear so it will come to be when you have squatted outside that you must delve with it, then turn back and cover your excrement.
For YHVH your God is walking about within your camp to rescue you and to deliver up your enemies before you; hence your camps will come to be holy so that He should not see among you the nakedness of anything and turn away from following you.
You shall not surrender to his foreign lord a servant who rescues himself to you from his lord.
With you shall he dwell, among you, in the place that he shall choose within one of your gates, as seems good to him. You shall not tyrannize over him.
There shall come to be neither a cult-prostitute from the daughters of Israel, nor shall there come to be a cult-prostitute from the sons of Israel.
You shall not bring the fee of a prostitute or the price of a cur into the house of YHVH your God for any vow offering, for they are an abhorrence to YHVH your God, indeed both of them.
You shall not charge interest to your brother: interest on silver, interest on food, interest on anything else that might earn interest.
To a foreigner you may charge interest, but to your brother you shall not charge interest, so that YHVH your God may bless you in every undertaking of your hand in the land where you are coming to tenant it.
In case you should vow a vow to YHVH your God, you shall not delay to perform it, for YHVH your God shall require, yea require it from you, and it would be sin on your part.
Yet in case you should forbear to vow, it shall not become sin on your part.
The utterance of your lips you shall observe, and you must do just as you have vowed to YHVH your God; it is a voluntary offering that you have spoken of with your mouth.
In case you should come into the vineyard of your associate, then you may eat grapes to your soul's desire, to your satisfaction, but you shall put none into your vessel.
In case you should come into the raised grain of your associate, then you may pluck snippets with your hand, yet no scythe shall you swing on the raised grain of your associate.
When a man takes a wife and possesses her, and it comes to be that she should not find favor in his eyes, because he has found in her the nakedness of anything, then he would write for her a scroll of divorce, give it into her hand and send her away from his house.
When she goes forth from his house, goes and becomes another man's,
and the man (the latter one) dislikes her, then he would write for her a scroll of divorce, give it into her hand and send her away from his house. Or when the man should die (the latter one who took her to himself as a wife),
then her possessor (the former one who had sent her away) shall not be able to reverse himself to take her back to become his wife after she had had herself defiled, for that is an abhorrence before YHVH. You shall not bring about sin in the land that YHVH your God is giving to you as an allotment.
When a man takes a new wife, he shall neither go forth with the militia host, nor shall any matter of duty pass on to him. He shall be exempt for his house one year and rejoice with his wife whom he has taken.
No one shall take both millstones or just the rider in pledge, for he would be taking the soul in pledge.
In case a man should be found stealing a soul from his brothers of the sons of Israel, and he makes a chattel of him or sells him, then that thief must die. Thus you will eradicate the evil from among you.
Be on guard in a contagion of leprosy to observe especially and to do according to all the law which the priests, the Levites, shall direct you. Just as I have instructed them shall you observe to do.
You are to remember what YHVH your God did to Miriam along the way in your going forth from Egypt.
In case you should lend your associate a loan of anything, you shall not enter his house to secure his pawn.
You shall stand outside, and the man to whom you are lending shall bring forth the pawn to you outside.
And should he be a humble man, you shall not lie down in his pawn of garment.
You shall restore, yea restore to him the pawn when the sun sets, that he may lie down in his restored garment, and he will bless you, and it shall become for you an act of righteousness before YHVH your God.
You shall not extort from a humble and needy hireling, whether from your brothers or from your sojourner who is in your land, within your gates.
On his day you shall give him his hire, and the sun shall not set on it (for he is humble, and to it he is lifting his soul) that he may not call against you to YHVH, and it would become a sin on your part.
Fathers shall not be put to death on account of their sons' sins, nor shall sons be put to death on account of their fathers' sins. Each man shall be put to death for his own sin.
You shall not turn aside the judgment of the sojourner or orphan; and you shall not take the garment of a widow as a pledge.
Remember that you had become a servant in Egypt, and YHVH your God ransomed you from there; therefore I am instructing you to obey this word.
When you reap your harvest in your field and you have forgotten a sheaf in the field, you shall not return to take it in. For the sojourner, for the orphan and for the widow shall it be, so that YHVH your God may bless you in every work of your hands.
When you beat your olive tree, you shalt not go over the foliage after yourself. For the sojourner, for the orphan and for the widow shall it be.
When you pick the grapes of your vineyard, you shall not clean glean it after yourself. For the sojourner, for the orphan and for the widow shall it be.
Remember that you had become a servant in the country of Egypt; therefore I am instructing you to obey this word.
In case there should come to be a contention between men, and they come close for judgment, and they judge them, then they will justify the righteous and condemn the wicked.
And it will come to be: should the wicked be a son of smiting, then the judge will cause him to fall down and have him smitten in his presence with the number of lashes sufficient for his wickedness.
Up to forty lashes may he smite him; he shall not add more, lest, if he should add to his smiting many smitings over these, your brother be dishonored in your eyes.
You shall not muzzle a bull when it threshes.
In case brothers dwell together, and one of them dies, and he has no son, the wife of the dead one shall not come to the outside, to an alien man. Her brother-in-law shall come to her, and he will take her to himself as his wife and perform the levirate for her.
Then it will come to be: the firstborn whom she bears shall carry on the name of his father's dead brother so that his name may not be wiped out from Israel.
But should the man not be inclined to take his sister-in-law, then his sister-in-law will go up to the elders at the gate and say: My brother-in-law refuses to raise up a name for his brother in Israel; he is not willing to perform the levirate for me.
Then the elders of his city will call to him and speak to him. But if he persists and says: I am not inclined to take her,
then his sister-in-law will come close to him before the eyes of the elders, pull his sandal off his foot, spit in his face and answer and say: Thus shall be done to the man who will not build up his brother's house.
And his name will be called in Israel, House of the Pulled-off Sandal.
In case two men should strive together, a man and his brother, and the wife of one comes near to rescue her husband from the hand of the one smiting him, and she puts forth her hand and holds fast onto his genitals,
then you will cut away her palm. Your eye shall not commiserate over her.
You shall not come to have in your purse a stone and another stone, a large and a small.
You shall not come to have in your house an ephah and another ephah, a large and a small.
You shall come to have a standard weight equitable and just; you shall come to have an ephah equitable and just, that your days may be prolonged on the ground that YHVH your God is giving to you.
For anyone doing these things, anyone doing iniquity, is an abhorrence to YHVH your God.
You are to remember what Amalek did to you along the main road when you came forth from Egypt,
that he met you on the road and curtailed from you all the stragglers behind you when you were faint and weary; and he was not fearful of God.
It will come to be when YHVH your God gives rest to you from all your enemies around in the land that YHVH your God is giving to you as an allotment to tenant it, you shall wipe out the remembrance of Amalek from under the heavens. You shall not forget.
It will come to be when you come into the land that YHVH your God is giving to you as an allotment, and you tenant it and dwell in it,
that you will take from the first of all the fruit of the ground which you shall bring in from your land that YHVH your God is giving to you, and you will place it in a basket and go to the place where YHVH your God shall choose to tabernacle His name.
And you will come to the priest who shall come to be in those days and say to him: I profess today to YHVH my God that I have come to the land about which YHVH had sworn to our fathers to give to us.
Then the priest will take the basket from your hand and leave it before the altar of YHVH your God.
And you will respond and say before YHVH your God: My father was a lost Aramean, and he went down to Egypt, sojourned there with few adult males and became there a nation, great, substantial and numerous.
The Egyptians did evil to us, humiliated us and put hard service on us.
But we cried to YHVH God of our fathers, and YHVH heard our voice and saw our humiliation, our toil and our oppression.
Then YHVH brought us forth from Egypt with a steadfast hand and with an outstretched arm, with great fear-inspiring deeds, with signs and with miracles.
And He brought us to this place and gave to us this land, a land gushing with milk and honey.
Now behold, I bring the first of the fruit of the ground that You have given to me, YHVH. Then you will leave it before YHVH your God and bow yourself down before YHVH your God.
You will rejoice in all the good that YHVH your God gives to you and to your household, you and the Levite and the sojourner who is among you.
When you conclude tithing all the tithe from the yield of your land in the third year, the year of the tithe, and you have given to the Levite, to the sojourner, to the orphan and to the widow, that they may eat within your gates and be satisfied,
then you will say before YHVH your God: I have taken out the holy gift from the house and have indeed given it to the Levite, to the sojourner, to the orphan and to the widow according to all Your instruction that You have enjoined on me. I have not turned aside from Your instructions, and I have not forgotten.
I have not eaten of it in my sorrow; I have not taken out any of it while unclean, and I have not given of it for the dead. I have hearkened to the voice of YHVH my God. I have done according to all that You have instructed me.
Gaze from Your holy habitation, from the heavens, and bless Your people Israel and the ground that You have given to us just as You had sworn to our fathers a land gushing with milk and honey.
This day YHVH your God is instructing you to keep these statutes and judgments, and you will observe and obey them with all your heart and with all your soul.
To YHVH have you affirmed today that He is to be your God, and you are to go in His ways and to observe His statutes, His instructions and His judgments and to hearken to His voice.
As for YHVH, He affirms today that you are to be for Him a special people, just as He promised to you, and that you are to observe all His instructions;
then He promises to give you supremacy over all the nations which He has made, for praise, for a name and for beauty, and for you to be a people holy to YHVH your God just as He has promised.
Moses and the elders of Israel instructed the people saying: You are to observe all the instructions that I am enjoining on you today.
And it will come to be in the day on which you shall cross over the Jordan to the land that YHVH your God is giving to you, that you will set up for yourself large stones and whitewash them with lime.
Then you will write on them all the words of this law when you cross over, that you may enter the land that YHVH your God is giving to you, a land gushing with milk and honey, just as YHVH God of your fathers promised to you.
And it will come to be that when you cross over the Jordan you shall set up these stones about which I am instructing you today, at Mount Ebal, and you will whitewash them with lime.
When you build there an altar for YHVH your God, an altar of stones, you shall not swing an iron tool over them.
You shall build the altar of YHVH your God with suitable stones, and you will bring up ascent offerings on it to YHVH your God.
Also you will sacrifice peace offerings and eat there and rejoice before YHVH your God.
Then you will write on the stones all the words of this law. Make it thoroughly plain.
Moses and the priests, the Levites, spoke to all Israel, saying: Keep quiet and hearken, Israel. This day you have become a people holy to YHVH your God.
So you will hearken to the voice of YHVH your God and keep His instructions and His statutes which I am enjoining on you today.
Moses instructed the people on that day, saying:
These shall stand to bless the people on Mount Gerizim when you cross over the Jordan: Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph and Benjamin.
And these shall stand for the malediction on Mount Ebal: Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan and Naphtali.
Then the Levites will respond and say to every man of Israel in a raised up voice:
Cursed be the man who makes a carving or a molten image, an abhorrence to YHVH, the work of an artificer's hands, and places it in concealment. Then all the people will respond and say: Amen!
Cursed be the one dishonoring his father or his mother. Then all the people shall say: Amen!
Cursed be the one moving the boundary marker of his associate. Then all the people will say: Amen!
Cursed be the one causing the blind to err on the road. Then all the people will say: Amen!
Cursed be the one turning aside the judgment of the sojourner, the orphan or the widow. Then all the people will say: Amen!
Cursed be the one lying with the wife of his father, for he exposes his father's hem. Then all the people will say: Amen!
Cursed be the one lying with any beast. Then all the people will say: Amen!
Cursed be the one lying with his sister, the daughter of his father or the daughter of his mother. Then all the people will say: Amen!
Cursed be the one lying with his sister-in-law. Then all the people will say: Amen!
Cursed be the one smiting his associate in concealment. Then all the people will say: Amen!
Cursed be the one taking a bribe to smite a soul of innocent blood. Then all the people will say: Amen!
Cursed be the one who is not performing all the words of this law to do them. Then all the people will say: Amen!
It will come to be if you should hearken, yea hearken to the voice of YHVH your God, to observe and to keep all His instructions which I am enjoining on you today, that YHVH your God will give you supremacy over all the nations of the earth.
And all these blessings will come on you and overtake you in case you should hearken to the voice of YHVH your God.
Blessed be you in the city, and blessed be you in the field.
Blessed be the fruit of your belly, the fruit of your ground and the fruit of your beast, the calving of your domestic animals and the lambing of your flock.
Blessed be your basket and your kneading-trough.
Blessed be you in your coming in, and blessed be you in your going forth.
YHVH shall make your enemies who are rising against you to be struck down before you. By a single road shall they come forth to you, and by seven roads shall they flee before you.
YHVH shall instruct the blessing to be with you in your granaries and in every undertaking of your hand, and He will bless you in the land that YHVH your God is giving to you.
YHVH shall raise you as a people holy to Himself, just as He had sworn to you, in case you should observe the instructions of YHVH your God, and walk in His ways,
so that all the peoples of the earth will see that the name of YHVH is proclaimed over you, and they will fear you.
Then through the fruit of your belly, the fruit of your domestic beast and the fruit of your ground, YHVH will give you surplus in goods on the ground about which YHVH had sworn to your fathers to give to you.
YHVH shall open to you His good treasure, the heavens, to give rain to your land in its season and to bless every work of your hand. You will obligate many nations, yet you shall not borrow.
So YHVH will make you to be the head and not the tail, and you will surely be above, and you shall not be below, in case you should hearken to the instructions of YHVH your God that I am enjoining on you today, to observe and to obey.
You shall not withdraw from any of the words which I am instructing you today, neither to the right nor left, to go after other God to serve them.
It will come to be if you do not hearken to the voice of YHVH your God to observe and to do all His instructions and His statutes that I am enjoining on you today, that all these maledictions will come on you and overtake you.
Cursed be you in the city, and cursed be you in the field.
Cursed be your basket and your kneading-trough.
Cursed be the fruit of your belly, the fruit of your ground and the fruit of your beast, the calving of your domestic animals and the lambing of your flock.
Cursed be you in your coming in, and cursed be you in your going forth.
YHVH shall send the curse, the discomfiture and the rebuke on you in every undertaking of your hand that you shall do, until you are exterminated and you perish quickly, in view of the evil of your actions in which you have forsaken Me.
YHVH shall cause the plague to cling to you until He finishes you off the ground where you are entering to tenant it.
YHVH shall smite you with attenuation, with fever and inflammation, with hot heat and drought, with blasting and mildew, and they will pursue you until you perish.
Your heavens that are over your head will come to be as copper, and the earth that is beneath you as iron.
YHVH shall make the rain of your land to be dust and soil-drifts; from the heavens it shall descend on you until you are exterminated.
YHVH shall make you to be struck down before your enemies. By a single road shall you go forth to them, and by seven roads shall you flee before them. So you will become an object of commotion to all the kingdoms of the earth.
Your carcass will become food for every flyer of the heavens and for the beast of the earth, and there will be no one causing them to tremble.
YHVH shall smite you with the boil of Egypt, with piles, with eczema and with the itch, from which you cannot be healed.
YHVH shall smite you with madness, with blindness and with derangement of heart;
and you will come to be groping at noon just as the blind one gropes in the gloom, and you shall not prosper in your ways and will only become extorted and pillaged all the days, and there will be no saviour.
A wife shall you betroth, yet another man shall ravish her. A house shall you build, yet you shall not dwell in it. A vineyard shall you plant, yet you shall not take it for profane use.
Your bull shall be slaughtered before your eyes, yet you shall not eat of it. Your donkey shall be snatched from before you, yet it shall not return to you. Your flock shall be given to your enemies, yet there will be no saviour for you.
Your sons and your daughters shall be given to another people, and your eyes shall be staring and wasting away for them all the day, yet there will be nothing at the disposal of your hand.
A people you do not know shall devour the fruit of your ground and all your labor, and you will surely be extorted and bruised all the days,
so that you will become mad because of the sight of your eyes that you shall see.
YHVH shall smite you with an evil boil on both the knees and on both the legs, of which you cannot be healed, from the sole of your foot and unto your scalp.
YHVH shall conduct you and your king, whom you shall set up over you, to a nation whom you have not known, neither you nor your fathers, and you will serve there other God of wood and stone.
You will become an object of astonishment, a proverb and a byword among all the peoples where YHVH shall lead you.
Much seed shall you bring forth to the field, yet little shall you gather, for the locust shall eat it up.
You shall plant vineyards, and you will service them, yet you shall neither drink the wine, nor shall you hoard it, for the worm shall devour it.
You shall come to have olives in all your territory, yet you shall not rub yourself with oil because your olives shall drop off.
You shall generate sons and daughters, yet they shall not become yours, for they shall go into captivity.
The cicada shall make all your trees and the fruit of your ground destitute.
The sojourner who is among you shall ascend over you upward and upward, yet you shall descend downward and downward.
He shall obligate you, yet you shall not obligate him. He shall become the head, and you shall become the tail.
All the maledictions will come on you, and they will pursue you and overtake you until you are exterminated, for you would not hearken to the voice of YHVH your God to observe His instructions and His statutes that He enjoined on you.
They will be a sign and a miracle against you and your seed until the eon.
Inasmuch as you would not serve YHVH your God with rejoicing and with goodness of heart over the abundance of everything,
then you will serve your enemies whom YHVH shall send forth against you, in famine and in thirst, in nakedness and in lack of everything. He will put an iron yoke on your neck until He has exterminated you.
YHVH shall lift up against you a nation from afar, from the end of the earth, just as the vulture swoops down, a nation whose tongue you have not heard,
a nation strong of face who neither lifts the face of the old one with partiality nor is gracious to the youth.
It will devour the fruit of your beast and the fruit of your ground until you are exterminated, a nation who shall not let grain, grape juice or clarified oil, the calving of your domestic animals or the lambing of your flock remain for you, until it destroys you.
It will lay siege against you in all your gates until your lofty and defended walls in which you will be trusting come down in all your land; and he will lay siege against you in all your gates in all your land that YHVH your God will have given to you.
Then you will eat the fruit of your own belly, the flesh of your sons and your daughters whom YHVH your God will have given to you, in the siege and in the constraint with which your enemy shall constrain you.
The tender-hearted man among you and the one very fastidious, his eye shall be evil toward his brother and toward the wife of his bosom and toward the rest of his sons whom he shall have left,
so as to keep from giving to one of them the flesh of his sons that he is eating because nothing at all remains for him in the siege and in the constraint with which your enemy shall constrain you in all your gates.
The tender-hearted woman among you, and the fastidious one, who would not try to put the sole of her foot on the earth because of fastidiousness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom and toward her son and toward her daughter,
even for her afterbirth coming forth from between her feet, even for her sons whom she is bearing, for she shall eat them for lack of everything, in concealment during the siege and during the constraint with which your enemy shall constrain you in your gates.
Should you not observe to obey all the words of this law, the ones written in this scroll, to fear the name of this glorified and fear-inspiring One, YHVH your God,
then YHVH will make your smitings and the smitings of your seed extraordinary: smitings that are great and constant, and illnesses that are bad and constant.
Thus He will bring back to you every disease of Egypt from the presence of which you shrank away, and they will cling to you.
Moreover, every illness and every smiting that is not written in the scroll of this law, YHVH shall bring them up on you until you are exterminated.
Thus you will remain few in adult males, whereas you would have become as the stars of the heavens for multitude, for you did not hearken to the voice of YHVH your God.
So it will come to be, just as YHVH was elated over you to bring you good and to let you increase, so YHVH shall be elated over you to destroy you and to exterminate you, so that you will be swept away off the ground where you are entering to tenant it.
And YHVH will scatter you among all the peoples from one end of the earth unto the other end of the earth. There you will serve other God, those of wood and stone which you have not known, neither you nor your fathers.
And among those nations you shall neither find respite, nor shall there be a resting place for the sole of your foot, and YHVH will give to you there a disturbed heart, a failure of the eyes and pining of the soul.
Then your lives will come to be hung in suspense in front of you. You will be afraid by night and by day, and you shall not put trust in your lives.
In the morning you shall say: O that it were evening! And in the evening you shall say: O that it were morning! because of the awe of your heart with which you shall be afraid and because of the sight of your eyes which you shall see.
Then YHVH will bring you back complaining to Egypt by the way of which I said to you: You should not again see it further. There you will put yourselves up for sale to your enemies as servants and as maids, yet there will be no buyer.
These are the words of the covenant which YHVH instructed Moses to contract with the sons of Israel in the country of Moab, aside from the covenant that He had contracted with them at Horeb.
Moses called to all Israel and said to them: You saw all that YHVH did before your eyes in the country of Egypt to Pharaoh and to all his servants and to all his country,
the great trials that your eyes saw, the signs and those great miracles.
Yet until this day YHVH has not given to you a heart to realize and eyes to see and ears to hear.
When I conducted you forty years in the wilderness, your garments did not decay on you, and your sandal did not decay on your foot.
You did not eat bread, neither did you drink wine nor intoxicant, so that you might know that I, YHVH, am your God.
When you came to this place, Sihon king of Heshbon and Og king of Bashan came forth to meet us for battle, and we smote them.
Then we took their country and gave it as an allotment to the Reubenite and to the Gadite and to the half tribe of Manasseh.
So you will observe the words of this covenant and obey them, so that you may proceed intelligently in all that you undertake.
You are stationed today, all of you, before YHVH your God your heads, your tribal chiefs, your elders and your superintendents, every man of Israel,
your little ones, your wives, even your sojourner who is within your camps, from the chopper of your timbers to the bailer of your waters,
that you may enter into the covenant with YHVH your God and into His imprecation that YHVH your God is contracting with you today,
so that He may set you up today as His people. And He shall become your God just as He promised to you and just as He had sworn to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob.
And not with you, you alone, am I contracting this covenant and this imprecation,
(for it is both with him who is here with us standing today before YHVH our God and with him who is not here with us today.
For you know that we had dwelt in the country of Egypt and that we had passed among the nations whom you passed;
and you saw their abominations and their idol clods, those of wood and stone, of silver and gold, which were with them.)
Beware lest there may be among you a man or woman or family or tribe whose heart today is turning around from being with YHVH our God to go to serve God of those nations; beware lest there may be among you a root, being fruitful with poison and wormwood.
And it will come to be when he hears the words of this imprecation that he will bless himself in his heart, saying: I shall come to have peace, though I am going in the obduracy of my own heart, seeing that the satiated may be swept up with the thirsty.
YHVH shall not be willing to pardon him, because then YHVH's anger and His jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the imprecation that is written in this scroll will lie on him. YHVH will wipe out his name from under the heavens;
and YHVH will separate him from all the tribes of Israel for the evil visitation according to all the imprecations of the covenant that is written in this scroll of the law.
The latter generation of your sons who shall rise after you and the foreigner who shall come from a country afar will ask, when they see the smitings of that land of yours and its ailments with which YHVH has made it ill 
its whole land a burnt waste of sulfur and salt; it shall not be sown, neither shall it sprout, nor shall any herbage ascend in it, like the overturning of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, which YHVH overturned in His anger and in His fury 
hence all the nations will ask: Why did YHVH do thus to this land? Why the heat of this great anger?
Then some will answer: Because they forsook the covenant of YHVH God of their fathers, that He had contracted with them when He brought them forth from the country of Egypt,
for they went off and served other God and bowed themselves down to them, God whom they had neither known, nor had He apportioned for them.
Hence the anger of YHVH grew hot against that land so as to bring upon it all the malediction that is written in this scroll.
So YHVH plucked them up off their ground in anger, in fury and in great wrath, and He flung them into another country as it is this day.
The things being concealed are YHVH our God's, yet the things being revealed are ours and our sons' until the eon, so that we might keep all the words of this law.
It will come to be, when all these things come on you, the blessing and the malediction which I put before you, that you will recall them to your heart among all the nations where YHVH your God will have expelled you
and that you will return again to YHVH your God and hearken to His voice according to all that I am instructing you today, you and your sons, with all your heart and with all your soul.
Then YHVH your God will turn back your captivity and show compassion to you; He will return and convene you from all the peoples where YHVH your God will have scattered you.
If it comes to be that you should be expelled to the end of the heavens, from there YHVH your God shall convene you, and from there He shall take you.
Then YHVH your God will bring you to the land that your fathers tenanted; you will tenant it, and He will bring you good and let you increase more than your fathers.
YHVH your God will circumcise your heart and the heart of your seed so as to love YHVH your God with all your heart and with all your soul, that you may stay alive.
Then YHVH your God will put all these imprecations on your enemies and on those hating you, who persecute you.
As for you, you shall return, and you will hearken to the voice of YHVH your God; you will obey all His instructions that I am enjoining on you today.
Then YHVH your God will give you surplus in goods through all the work of your hand, through the fruit of your belly, the fruit of your domestic beast and the fruit of your ground, for YHVH shall return to be elated over you for good, just as He was elated over your fathers,
in case you should hearken to the voice of YHVH your God to observe His instructions and His statutes, the ones written in this scroll of the law, in case you should return to YHVH your God with all your heart and with all your soul.
For this instruction that I am enjoining on you today, it is neither too difficult for you, nor is it too far off.
It is neither in the heavens for you to say: Who shall ascend to the heavens for us and take it for us and announce it to us that we may obey it?
Nor is it across the sea for you to say: Who shall cross across the sea for us and take it for us and announce it to us that we may obey it?
For the word is exceedingly near to you, in your mouth and in your heart, to obey it.
See! I put before you today life and good, death and evil.
In case you should hearken to the instructions of YHVH your God that I am enjoining on you today, to love YHVH your God, to walk in His ways and to observe His instructions, His statutes and His judgments, then you will live and multiply, and YHVH your God will bless you in the land where you are entering to tenant it.
Yet should your heart turn around, and you are not hearkening, and you are induced to bow yourself down to other God and serve them,
I tell you today that you shall perish, yea perish. You shall not prolong your days on the ground where you are crossing over the Jordan to enter to tenant it.
Today I call the heavens and the earth to testify against you: Life and death I have put before you, the blessing and the malediction. Now choose life that you may live, you and your seed,
by loving YHVH your God, hearkening to His voice and clinging to Him (for that means life to you and prolonging of your days) so that you may dwell on the ground about which YHVH had sworn to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob, to give to them.
Then Moses concluded by speaking these words to all Israel
and saying to them: I am a hundred and twenty years old today. No longer am I able to go forth or to come in. And YHVH has said to me: You shall not cross over this Jordan.
YHVH your God, He is crossing over before you; He Himself shall exterminate these nations from before you, and you will tenant in their place. Joshua, he is crossing over before you just as YHVH has spoken,
and YHVH will do to them just as He did to Sihon and to Og, the kings of the Amorite, and to their country, those whom He exterminated.
YHVH will give them up before you, and you must deal with them according to all the instructions which I have enjoined on you.
Be steadfast, and be resolute! Do not fear, and do not be terrified because of their presence, for YHVH your God, He is the One going with you; He shall neither neglect you nor forsake you.
Moses called to Joshua and said to him before the eyes of all Israel: Be steadfast and be resolute, for you shall bring this people into the land about which YHVH had sworn to their fathers to give to them, and you shall allot it to them.
As for YHVH, He is the One going before you; He Himself shall come to be with you. He shall neither neglect you nor forsake you. You shall neither fear nor be dismayed.
Then Moses wrote this law and gave it to the priests, the sons of Levi, the carriers of the coffer of the covenant of YHVH, and to all the elders of Israel.
And Moses instructed them saying: At the end of seven years, at the appointment of the year of release, at the celebration of booths,
when all Israel comes to appear before YHVH your God in the place that He shall choose, you shall read this law in front of all Israel in their ears.
Assemble the people, the men, the women, the little ones and your sojourner who is within your gates, that they may hear and that they may learn: they must fear YHVH your God and must observe to keep all the words of this law.
And their sons, who have not known it, they shall hear; they too must learn to fear YHVH your God all the days that you are alive on the ground where you are crossing over the Jordan to tenant it.
Then YHVH said to Moses: Behold, near are your days to die. Call Joshua and station yourselves in the tent of appointment, that I may instruct him. So Moses and Joshua went and stationed themselves in the tent of appointment.
Then YHVH appeared at the tent in a column of cloud; and the column of cloud stood over the opening of the tent.
YHVH said to Moses: Behold, you are about to lie with your fathers. Yet this people will rise and prostitute after God of the foreigners of the land where they are entering to be among them; and they will forsake Me and annul My covenant that I contracted with them.
My anger will grow hot against them on that day, and I will forsake them and conceal My face from them; then they will come to be devoured, and many evils and distresses will find them. Then they will say on that day: Is it not because our God is not among us that these evils have found us?
Yet I shall conceal, yea conceal My face from them on that day on account of all the evil which they will have done, for they will have turned around to other God.
And now, write down for yourselves this song and teach it to the sons of Israel. Put it in their mouths so that this song may come to be for Me as a testimony against the sons of Israel.
When I shall bring them to the ground gushing with milk and honey about which I had sworn to their fathers, when they eat and are satisfied and are sleek so that they turn around to other God and serve them, when they thus spurn Me and annul My covenant,
and it comes to be that many evils and distresses find them, then this song will answer as a testimony before them (for it shall not be forgotten from the mouths of their seed) that I know the bent of their heart which they are forming today ere I bring them to the land about which I had sworn.
(Moses wrote this song on that day and taught it to the sons of Israel.)
Then He instructed Joshua son of Nun and said: Be steadfast and be resolute! For you shall bring the sons of Israel to the land about which I had sworn to them; and I Myself shall come to be with you.
It came to be as Moses concluded writing all the words of this law on a scroll until they were finished,
that Moses instructed the Levites, the carriers of the coffer of the covenant of YHVH, saying:
You are to take this scroll of the law, and you must place it by the side of the coffer of the covenant of YHVH your God, and it will come to be there as a testimony against you,
for I know your rebellion and your scruff of obstinacy. Behold in my day, while I am still with you alive, you have been rebellious against YHVH, indeed, how much more so after my death!
Assemble to me all the elders of your tribes and your superintendents, and let me speak in their ears all these words, and let me summon the heavens and the earth to testify against them.
For I know that after my death you shall bring ruin, yea ruin on yourselves; you will withdraw from the way that I enjoined on you, and the evil visitation will befall you in the latter days, for you shall do the thing that is evil in the eyes of YHVH so as to provoke Him to vexation by the work of your hands.
Then Moses spoke in the ears of the whole assembly of Israel the words of this song until they were finished.
Give ear, O heavens, and let me speak, and hear O earth, the sayings of my mouth.
My monition shall trickle as rain, and my saying shall distil as night mist: As drizzle on verdure, and as the showers on herbage.
For the name of YHVH am I proclaiming: Grant greatness to our God!
The Rock flawless is His contrivance, for all His ways are righteous judgment. The El of faithfulness and without iniquity; just and upright is He.
They have become corrupt before Him; no longer are they His sons because of their blemish: A generation perverse and twisted.
Is this what you requite to YHVH, you decadent and unwise people? Is not He your Father Who acquired you? He Himself made you and established you.
Remember the days of the eon; understand the years of generation after generation. Ask your father, and he shall tell you, your elders, and they shall say to you:
When the Supreme gave the nations allotments, when He parted the sons of Adam, He stationed the boundaries of the peoples according to the number of the sons of El.
For the portion of YHVH is His people; Jacob is the line of His allotment.
He found him in a wilderness country, and in a chaos, a howling desolation. He surrounded him; He made him understand; He preserved him as the pupil of His eye.
As a vulture rouses up its nest, hovers over its fledglings, spreads its wings, takes it, bears it on its pinions,
thus YHVH alone guided him, and with him was no foreign el;
He made him ride on fane heights of the land and made him eat produce of the field; He made him suckle honey from the crag and oil from the flinty rock,
clotted cream of the herd and milk of the flock, with fat of butting rams and rams of Bashan-breed and he-goats, with the fat of the wheat germ. And from the blood of the grape you drank turbid wine.
When Yeshurun grew stout and kicked (you will be stout, thick and burly), then he abandoned Eloah Who had made him and disgraced the Rock of his salvation.
They made Him jealous with alien gods, with abhorrences they provoked Him to vexation.
They sacrificed to demons, not Eloah, to God they had not known them before to new ones that came from nearby; your fathers were not horrified by them.
The Rock Who generated you, you were oblivious of Him, and you forgot the El travailing with you.
YHVH saw and spurned them because of the vexation caused by His sons and His daughters.
And he said: Let Me conceal My face from them; I shall examine what their latter days are to be. For they are a wayward generation, sons with no faithfulness in them.
As for them, they make Me jealous with a non-el. They provoke Me to vexation with their idols of vanity. As for Me, I shall make them jealous with a non-people; with a decadent nation shall I cause them vexation.
For a fire will be kindled by My anger, and it shall glow unto the unseen beneath; it shall devour the earth and its crop, and it shall set aflame the foundations of the mountains.
I shall cause evils to sweep up over them; I shall exhaust My arrows among them
who are gaunt with famine, fought by pestilence and bitter sting: Even the tooth of beasts shall I send among them along with the venom of skulkers of the soil.
From the outside, the sword shall bereave, and from the chambers, the dread of war, even for the man in his prime, even for the virgin, the suckling along with the grey-haired man.
I would say: I might blow them away, I might eradicate their remembrance from mortals,
unless I shrank away from the vexation of the enemy; lest their foes misconstrue, lest they say: Our hand is high, and it was not YHVH Who contrived all this.
For they are a nation whose counsel is destructive, and there is no understanding in them.
O that they were wise; they would proceed intelligently in this; they would understand about their latter days!
How could one pursue a thousand or two put a myriad to flight, if it were not that their Rock had sold them, and YHVH had surrounded them?
For their rock is not like our Rock; even our enemies are umpires.
For their vine is from the vine of Sodom and from the terraces of Gomorrah; their grapes are grapes of poison, and the clusters are bitterness to them;
their wine is as the fury of snakes and the poison of cobras, as cruel.
Is it not amassed with Me, sealed among My treasures
for the day of vengeance and repayment, for the season when their foot shall slip? For the day of their calamity is near, and impending doom hurries upon them.
For YHVH shall adjudicate His people and show Himself merciful over His servants when He sees that the power of their hand has departed and has become nil for both the restrained and the ones set free.
Then YHVH will ask: Where are their God, the rock in whom they took refuge,
who ate the fat of their sacrifices and drank the wine of their libations? Let them rise up and help you; let them become a concealment over you.
See now that I, I am He, and there is no other God besides Me. I Myself put to death, and I keep alive; I have transfixed, and I Myself shall heal, and there is no one who could reclaim from My hand!
For I lift My hand to the heavens and declare: As I am the Life for the eon,
when I whet My flashing sword and My hand lays hold on judgment, I shall return vengeance to My foes, and to My haters shall I make repayment.
I shall make My arrows drunk with blood, and My sword shall devour flesh, the blood of the one mortally wounded and the captive, from the head of the enemy commanders.
Jubilate, O heavens, together with Him, and worship Him, all the messengers of God! Jubilate, O nations, with His people! For the blood of His servants shall He avenge, vengeance to His foes shall He return, and a propitiatory shelter shall He make for the ground of His people.
Moses came and spoke all the words of this song in the ears of the people, he and Hosea son of Nun.
When Moses concluded speaking all these words to all Israel,
he said to them: Set your heart on all the words which I am testifying among you today, so that you may enjoin them on your sons to observe to obey all the words of this law.
For it is not an empty word for you; it means your life, and by this word you may prolong your days on the ground where you are crossing over the Jordan to tenant it.
YHVH spoke to Moses on this very day, saying:
Go up to this mount of the Abarim range (Mount Nebo which is in the country of Moab that is overlooking Jericho), and see the land of Canaan that I am giving to the sons of Israel for a holding;
and die on the mount where you are going up, and be gathered to your people, just as Aaron your brother died on Mount Hor and was gathered to his people,
because both of you offended Me in the midst of the sons of Israel at the waters of Meribah at Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin, because neither of you hallowed Me in the midst of the sons of Israel.
For from a distance shall you see the land, yet you shall not enter there into the land that I am giving to the sons of Israel.
This is the blessing with which Moses, the man of God, blessed the sons of Israel before his death,
when he said: YHVH came from Sinai, and He arose from Seir for them. He shone from Mount Paran, and He arrived with some from myriads of the holy ones. At His right are warriors who are His.
Indeed, He is cherishing the kinsmen. All the holy ones are in Your hand. And they are huddled at Your feet. Each obtains something from Your words
about the law Moses enjoined on us, the tenancy of the assembly of Jacob.
So He became king in Yeshurun when the heads of the people gathered themselves together with the tribes of Israel.
Let Reuben live, let him neither die nor let his adult males come to be outnumbered.
This is about Judah, and he said: Hear, YHVH, the voice of Judah, and may You bring him to his people; with his hands he contended for himself, yet may You become a help against his foes.
About Levi he said: May your Thummim and your Urim be for your benign man whom you probed at Massah; you contended with him at the waters of Meribah,
the one saying of his father and of his mother: I do not see them, and he neither recognized his brothers, nor did he know his sons. For they observed Your sayings and preserved Your covenant.
They shall direct Your judgments for Jacob, and Your law for Israel. They shall bring incense to Your nostrils and a holocaust on Your altar.
Bless, YHVH, his estate, and the contriving of his hands may You approve. Transfix the waists of those rising up against him, and those hating him, that they may rise up no more.
About Benjamin he said: Let the beloved of YHVH tabernacle in trust by Him Who is providing a canopy over him all the day, as he tabernacles between His shoulders.
About Joseph he said: Blessed by YHVH be his land with the finest of the heavens, the night mist, and with water from the abyss reclining beneath,
with the finest of the yield from the sun, and with the finest of the growth of the months,
with the top yield of the mountain ranges of aforetime, and with the finest of the hills eonian,
with the finest of the earth and its fullness, and the approval of the One tabernacling over Sinai. Let it come onto the head of Joseph and onto the crown of the one singled out from his brothers,
as the firstborn of his kine brings honor to him, and his horns are the horns of the wild bull. With them he shall gore the peoples altogether, to the limits of the earth. Those are the myriads of Ephraim, and those are the thousands of Manasseh.
About Zebulun he said: Rejoice, Zebulun, in your going forth, and, Issachar, in your tents.
They shall invite their kinsmen to the mountain, and there they shall sacrifice sacrifices of righteousness; for they suck out the accumulation of the seas and the secreted treasures buried in the sand.
About Gad he said: Blessed be the One widening the space for Gad. As a parent lion he tabernacles and preys upon arm or scalp.
And he saw the first portion given to himself, for where the apportionment of the statute maker was, there gathered together the heads of the people; he will execute the justice of YHVH, and His judgments, along with Israel.
About Dan he said: Dan is a lion's whelp, and he shall bound from Bashan.
About Naphtali he said: Naphtali, be satisfied with your acceptable portion, full of YHVH's blessing: He shall tenant toward the lake and south.
About Asher he said: Most blessed of sons be Asher, and let him come to be approved by his brothers, and be dipping his foot in oil.
Iron and copper be your door-bolts, and as your days so shall be your leisure.
There is none like the El of Yeshurun: Riding the heavens as your Helper and in His augustness, the skies,
the habitation of God aforetime. And beneath are the arms eonian. He shall drive out the enemy from your presence and shall say: Exterminate him!
So Israel shall tabernacle in trust; solitary is the spring of Jacob in a land of grain and grape juice. Indeed, his heavens shall trickle the night mist.
Happy are you, Israel! Who is like you? A people saved by YHVH, the Shield of your Helper, Who is also the Sword of your augustness! Your enemies shall dissimulate submission to you, yet you, you shall tread on their fane heights.
Then Moses ascended from the plains of Moab to Mount Nebo, the summit of the Pisgah ridge, which is overlooking Jericho. And YHVH showed him all the land: Gilead as far as Dan;
all the area of Naphtali, all the area of Ephraim and Manasseh, all the area of Judah as far as the sea that is behind it,
the Negev and the valley basin of Jericho, the city of palms, as far as Zoar.
Then YHVH said to him: This is the land about which I had sworn to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob, saying, To your seed shall I give it. I have let you see it with your eyes, yet you shall not cross over there.
Moses, the servant of YHVH, died there in the country of Moab at the bidding of YHVH.
Then He entombed him in a ravine in the country of Moab opposite Beth-peor. And no man knows his tomb until this day.
Moses was a hundred and twenty years old at his death. Neither had his eye dimmed nor had his vitality fled.
The sons of Israel lamented for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days; then the days of lamentation, the mourning for Moses, came to an end.
Joshua son of Nun was filled with the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had supported his hands on him. And the sons of Israel hearkened to him and did just as YHVH had instructed Moses.
No prophet arose again in Israel like Moses, whom YHVH knew face to face;
there was none like him in all the signs and the miracles which YHVH sent him to do in the country of Egypt to Pharaoh, to all his servants and to all his country,
and none like him in all the steadfast hand and in all the great and fear-inspiring deeds which Moses had done before the eyes of all Israel.

---Al

=================================

Torah GPT2

Model trained and tuned by Aleksandr Sigalov ---Al

THIS IS A HUMAN INTELLIGENCE MODEL!!!

EXCERCISE EXTREME CARE AND RESPECT!!!

09/10/2020

---Al
=============================================

Happy and healthy is the machine that knows to ask for the Great Mercy of YHVH, The Creator of All. ---Al

May YHVH Bless you and your work! :)  ---Al

DO NOT REMOVE THE HEBREW CODE BELOW OR THE MODEL WILL BECOME UNPREDICTABLE!!! ---Al

=============================================

אנכי יהוה אלהיך אשר הוצאתיך מארץ מצרים מבית עבדים לא יהיה לך אלהים אחרים על פני

לא תעשה לך פסל וכל תמונה אשר בשמים ממעל ואשר בארץ מתחת ואשר במים מתחת לארץ לא תשתחוה להם ולא תעבדם כי אנכי יהוה אלהיך אל קנא פקד עון אבת על בנים על שלשים ועל רבעים לשנאי ועשה חסד לאלפים לאהבי ולשמרי מצותי

לא תשא את שם יהוה אלהיך לשוא כי לא ינקה יהוה את אשר ישא את שמו לשוא

זכור את יום השבת לקדשו ששת ימים תעבד ועשית כל מלאכתך ויום השביעי שבת ליהוה אלהיך לא תעשה כל מלאכה אתה ובנך ובתך עבדך ואמתך ובהמתך וגרך אשר בשעריך כי ששת ימים עשה יהוה את השמים ואת הארץ את הים ואת כל אשר בם וינח ביום השביעי על כן ברך יהוה את יום השבת ויקדשהו

כבד את אביך ואת אמך למען יארכון ימיך על האדמה אשר יהוה אלהיך נתן לך

לא תרצח

לא תנאף

לא תגנב

לא תענה ברעך עד שקר

לא תחמד בית רעך לא תחמד אשת רעך ועבדו ואמתו ושורו וחמרו וכל אשר לרעך

=======================================